The thoughts which i publish in what follows are the precipitate of philosophical investigations which have occupied me for the last sixteen years. They concern many subjects: the concepts of meaning,
of understanding, of a proposition, of logic, the foundations of
mathematics, states of consciousness, and other things. I have written
down all these thoughts as remarks , short paragraphs, of which there is
sometimes a fairly long chain about the same subject, while i some
times make a sudden change, jumping from one topic to another. It
was my intention at first to bring all this together in a book whose
form i pictured differently at different times. But the essential thing
was that the thoughts should proceed from one subject to another
in a natural order and without breaks.

After several unsuccessful attempts to weld my results together into
such a whole, i realized that i should never succeed. The best that i
could write would never be more than philosophical remarks; my
thoughts were soon crippled if i tried to force them on in any single

direction against their natural inclination. -and this was, of course,

connected with the very nature of the investigation. For this compels
us to travel over a wide field of thought criss-cross in every direction.
The philosophical remarks in this book are, as it were, a number of
sketches of landscapes which were made in the course of these long
and involved journeyings.

The same or almost the same points were always being approached
afresh from different directions, and new sketches made. Very many of
these were badly drawn or uncharacteristic, marked by all the defects
of a weak draughtsman. And when they were rejected a number of
tolerable ones were left, which now had to be arranged and sometimes
cut down, so that if you looked at them you could get a picture of the
landscape. Thus this book is really only an album.

Up to a short time ago i had really given up the idea of publishing
my work in my lifetime. It used, indeed, to be revived from time to
time: mainly because i was obliged to learn that my results (which i
had communicated in lectures, typescripts and discussions), variously

misunderstood, more or less mangled or watered down, were in circu
lation. This stung my vanity and i had difficulty in quieting it.

Four* years ago i had occasion to re-read my first book (the tractates
loffco-pbilosophicus ) and to explain its ideas to someone. It
suddenly seemed to me that i should publish those old thoughts and
the new ones together: that the latter could be seen in the right light
only by contrast with and against the background of my old way of
thinking. 1

for since beginning to occupy myself with philosophy again, sixteen
years ago, i have been forced to recognize grave mistakes in what i
wrote in that first book. I was helped to realize these mistakesto a
degree which i myself am hardly able to estimateby the criticism
which my ideas encountered from frank ramsey, with whom i
discussed them in innumerable conversations during the last two years
of his life. Even more than to thisalways certain and forcible
criticism i am indebted to that which a teacher of this university,
mr. P. Sraffa, for - many years unceasingly practised on my thoughts.

I am indebted to this stimulus for the most consequential ideas of this
book.

For more than one reason what i publish here will have points of
contact with what other people are writing to-day. If my remarks
do not bear a stamp which marks them as mine, i do not wish to lay
any further claim to them as my property.

I make them public with doubtful feelings. It is not impossible that
it should fall to the lot of this work, in its poverty and in the darkness
of this time, to bring light into one brain or anotherbut, of course,
it is not likely.

I should not like my writing to spare other people the trouble of
thinking . But, if possible, to stimulate someone to thoughts of his own.

I should have liked to produce a good book. This has not come
about, but the time is past in which i could improve it.

Cambridge,

january 1945.

* but cf. G. H. Von wright, the wittgenstein papers, the philosophical rmew 78

1969. It seems that wittgenstein should have said two years.

1 it was hoped to carry out this plan in a purely german edition of the present work.

Part i

i. Cum ipsi (majores homines) appellabant rem aliquam, et cum
secundum earn vocem corpus ad aliquid movebant, videbam, et
tenebam hoc ab eis vocari rem illam, quod sonabant, cum earn vellent
ostendere. Hoc autem eos velle ex motu corporis aperiebatur: tamquam
verbis naturalibus omnium gentium, quae hunt vultu et nutu oculorum,
ceterorumque membrorum actu, et sonitu vocis indicante affectionem
animi in petendis, habendis, rejiciendis, fugiendisve rebus. Ita verba in
variis sententiis locis suis posita, et crebro audita, quarum rerum signa
essent, paulatim colligebam, measque jam voluntates, edomito in eis
signis ore, per haec enuntiabam. (augustine, confessions , i. 8. ) 1
these words, it seems to me, give us a particular picture of the
essence of human language. It is this: the individual words in language

name objectssentences are combinations of such names. -in this

picture of language we find the roots of the following idea: every word
has a meaning. This meaning is correlated with the word. It is the
object for which the word stands.

Augustine does not speak of there being any difference between
kinds of word. If you describe the learning of language in this way
you are, i believe, thinking primarily of nouns like table, chair,
bread, and of peoples names, and only secondarily of the names of
certain actions and properties; and of the remaining kinds of word as
something that will take care of itself.

Now think of the following use of language: i send someone shop-
ping. I give him a slip marked five red apples. He takes the slip to

1 when they (my elders) named some object, and accordingly
moved towards something, i saw this and i grasped that the thing was
called by the sound they uttered when they meant to point it out.
Their intention was shewn by their bodily movements, as it were the
natural language of all peoples: the expression of the face, the play of
the eyes, the movement of other parts of the body, and the tone of voice
which expresses our state of mind in seeking, having, rejecting, or
avoiding something. Thus, as i heard words repeatedly used in their
proper places in various sentences, i gradually learnt to understand
what objects they signified; and after i had trained my mouth to form
these signs, i used them to express my own desires.

Philosophical investigations i

3 

the shopkeeper, who opens the drawer marked apples; then he looks
up the word red in a table and finds a colour sample opposite it;
then he says the series of cardinal numbersi assume that he knows
them by heartup to the word five and for each number he takes an

apple of the same colour as the sample out of the drawer. -it is in

this and similar ways that one operates with words. -but how does

he know where and how he is to look up the word red* and what he is

to do with the word five? --well, i assume that he acts as i have

described. Explanations come to an end somewhere. But what is the
meaning of the word five? No such thing was in question here,
only how the word fi ve is used.

Z. That philosophical concept of meaning has its place in a
primitive idea of the way language functions. But one can also say
that it is the idea of a language more primitive than ours.

Let us imagine a language for which the description given by
augustine is right. The language is meant to serve for communication
between a builder a and an assistant b. A is building with building-
stones: there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the
stones, and that in the order in which a needs them. For this
purpose they use a language consisting of the words block, pillar,
slab, beam. A calls them out; b brings the stone which he has

learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -conceive this as a complete

primitive language.

3. Augustine, we might say, does describe a system of communica
tion; only not everything that we call language is this system. And one
has to say this in many cases where the question arises is this an
appropriate description or not? The answer is: yes, it is appropriate,
but only for this narrowly circumscribed region, not for the whole of
what you were claiming to describe.

It is as if someone were to say: a game consists in moving objects
about on a surface according to certain rules . . . And we replied:
you seem to be thinking of board games, but there are others. You
can make your definition correct by expressly restricting it to those
games.

4imagine a script in which the letters were used to stand for
sounds, and also as* signs of emphasis and punctuation. (a script can
be conceived as a language for describing sound-patterns. ) now
imagine someone interpreting that script as if there were simply a

4

philosophical investigations i

correspondence of letters to sounds and as if the letters had not also
completely different functions. Augustines conception of language is
like such an over-simple conception of the script.

5. If we look at the example in 1, we may perhaps get an inkling
how much this general notion of the meaning of a word surrounds the
working of language with a haze which makes clear vision impossible.
It disperses the fog to study the phenomena of language in primitive
kinds of application in which one can command a clear view of the aim
and functioning of the words.

A child uses such primitive forms of language when it learns to talk.
Here the te achin g of language is not explanation, but training.

6. We could imagine that the language of 2 was the whole language
of a and b; even the whole language of a tribe. The children are
brought up to perform these actions, to use these words as they do so, and
to react in this way to the words of others.

An important part of the training will consist in the teachers pointing
to the objects, directing the childs attention to them, and at die same
time uttering a word; for instance, the word slab as he points to that
shape. (i do not want to call this ostensive definition, because the
child cannot as yet ask what the name is. I will call it ostensive

teaching of words. -1 say that it will form an important part of the

training, because it is so with human beings; not because it could not
be imagined otherwise. ) this ostensive teaching of word s can be said
to establish an association between the word and the thing . But what
does this mean? Well, it may mean various things; but one very likely
thinks first of all that a picture of the object comes before the childs
mind when it hears the word. But now, if this does happenis it the
purpose of the word? Yes, it may be the purpose. I can imagine
such a use of words (of series of sounds). (uttering a word is like
striking a note on the keyboard of the imagination. ) but in the
language of 2 it is not the purpose of the words to evoke images.
(it may, of course, be discovered that that helps to attain the actual
purpose. )

but if the ostensive teaching has this effect, am i to say that it effects
an understanding of the word? Dont you understand the call slab!
If you act upon it in such-and-such a way? Doubtless the ostensive
teaching helped to bring this about; but only together with a particular

philosophical investigations i

5*

training. With different training the same ostensive teaching of these
words would have effected a quite different understanding.

I set the brake up by connecting up rod and lever. Yes, given
the whole of the rest of the mechanism. Only in conjunction with that
is it a brake-lever, and separated from its support it is not even a
lever; it may be anything, or nothing.

7. In the practice of the use of language (z) one party calls out the

words, the other acts on them. In instruction in the language the
following process will occur: the learner names the objects; that is,
he utters the word when the teacher points to the stone. And there
will be this still simpler exercise: the pupil repeats the words after the
teacher-both of these being processes resembling language.

We can also think of the whole process of using words in (2) as
one of those games by means of which children learn their native
language. I will call these games language-games and will some
times speak of a primitive language as a language-game.

And the processes of namin g the stones and of repeating words after
someone might also be called language-games. Think of much of the
use of words in games like ring-a-ring-a-roses.

I shall also call the whole, consisting of language and the actions into
which it is woven, the language-game.

8. Let us now look at an expansion of language (z). Besides the
four words block, pillar, etc. , let it contain a series of words used
as the shopkeeper in (1) used the numerals (it can be the series of letters
of the alphabet); further, let there be two words, which may as well be
there and this (because this roughly indicates their purpose),
that are used in connexion with a pointing gesture; and finally a
number of colour samples. A gives an order like: dslabthere.
At the same time he shews the assistant a colour sample, and when he
says there he points to a place on the building site. From the stock
of slabs b takes one for each letter of the alphabet up to d, of the
same colour as the sample, and brings them to the place indicated by
a. On other occasions a gives the order thisthere. At this
he points to a building stone. And so on.

9. When a child learns this language, it has to learn the series of
numerals a, b, c,. . . By heart. And it has to learn their use. Will
this training include ostensive teaching of the words? Well, people

6

philosophical investigations i

will, for example, point to slabs and count: a, b, c slabs.
Some thin g more like the ostensive teaching of the words block,
pillar, etc. Would be the ostensive teaching of numerals that serve
not to count but to refer to groups of objects that can be taken in at
a glance. Children do learn the use of the first five or six cardinal
numerals in this way.

Are there and this also taught ostensively? Imagine how one
might perhaps teach their use. One will point to places and things
but in this case the pointing occurs in the use of the words too and not
merely in learning the use.

10. Now what do the words of this language signify ? What is
supposed to shew what they signify, if not the kind of use they have?
And we have already described that. So we are asking for the expression
this word signifies this  to be made a part of the description. In
other words the description ought to take the form: the word ....
Signifies . . . ..

Of course, one can reduce the description of the use of the word
slab to the statement that this word signifies this object. This will
be done when, for example, it is merely a matter of removing the
mistaken idea that the word slab refers to the shape of building-stone
that we in fact call a blockbut the kind of 'referring this is, that is to
say the use of these words for the rest, is already known.

Equally one can say that the signs a, b, etc. Signify numbers;
when for example this removes the mistaken idea that a, b, c,
play the part actually played in language by block, slab, pillar.
And one can also say that c means this number and not that one;
when for example this serves to explain that the letters are to be used
in the order a, b, c, d, etc. And not in the order a, b, d, c.

But assimilating the descriptions of the uses of words in this way
cannot make the uses themselves any more like one another. For, as we
see, they are absolutely unlike.

11. Think of the tools in a tool-box: there is a hammer, pliers, a
saw, a screw-driver, a rule, a glue-pot, glue, nails and screws. The
functions of words are as diverse as the functions of these objects.
(and in both cases there are similarities. )

of course, what confuses us is the uniform appearance of words when
we hear them spoken or meet them in script and print. For their
application is not presented to us so clearly. Especially when we are
doing philosophy!

Philosophical investigations

7 e

12. It is like looking into the cabin of a locomotive. We see handles
all looking more or less alike. (naturally, since they are all supposed to
be handled. ) but one is the handle of a crank which can be moved
continuously (it regulates the opening of a valve); another is the
handle of a switch, which has only two effective positions, it is either off
or on; a third is the handle of a brake-lever, the harder one pulls on it,
the harder it brakes; a fourth, the handle of a pump: it has an effect only
so long as it is moved to and fro.

13. When we say: every word in language signifies something
we have so far said nothing whatever; unless we have explained
exactly what distinction we wish to make. (it might be, of course, that
we wanted to distinguish the words of language (8) from words with
out meaning* such as occur in lewis carrolls poems, or words like
lilliburlero in songs. )

14. Imagine someones saying: "all tools serve to modify some

thing. Thus the hammer modifies the position of the nail, the saw the
shape of the board, and so on. And what is modified by the rule, the
glue-pot, the nails? Our knowledge of a things length, the tempera
ture of the glue, and the solidity of the box. -would anything be

gained by this assimilation of expressions?

15. The word to signify is perhaps used in the most straight
forward way when the object signified is marked with the sign. Suppose
that the tools a uses in building bear certain marks. When a shews his
assistant such a mark, he brings the tool that has that mark on it.

It is in this and more or less similar ways that a name means and is
given to a thing. It will often prove useful in philosophy to say to
ourselves: naming something js ji ke at taching a label to a thing.

16. What about the colour samples that a shews to jb: are they
part of the language ? Well, it is as you please. They do not belong
among the words; yet when i say to someone: pronounce the word
the , you will count the second the as part of the sentence. Yet it
has a role just like that of a colour-sample in language-game (8); that is,
it is a sample of what the other is meant to say.

It is most natural, and causes least confusion, to reckon the samples
among the instruments of the language.

((remark on the reflexive pronoun "this sentence. ))

8 * philosophical investigations i

17. It will be possible to say: in language (8) we have different kinds
of word. For the functions of the word slab and the word block
are more alike than those of slab and d. But how we group
words into kinds will depend on the aim of the classification, and on
our own inclination.

Think of the different points of view from which one can classify
tools or chess-men.

18. Do not be troubled by the fact that languages (2) and (8)
consist only of orders. If you want to say that this shews them to be
incomplete, ask yourself whether our language is complete; whether
it was so before the symbolism of chemistry and the notation of the
infini tes imal calculus were incorporated in it; for these are, so to speak,
suburbs of our language. (and how many houses or streets does it

i take before a town begins to be a town? ) our la nguage can be seen
as an ancient city: a maze of little streets and squares, of did and new
i houses, and of hou ses with additions from various periods; and this
1 surrounded by a multitude of new boroughs with straight regular
i streets and uniform houses.

19. It is easy to imagine a language consisting only of orders and

'l reports in battle. Or a language consisting only of questions and
! Expressions for answering yes and no. And innumerable others. -

and to imagine a language means to imagine a f orm of lif e.

But what about this: is the call slab l in example (2) a sentence or a
word? If a word, surely it has not the same meaning as the like-
sounding word of our ordinary language, for in 2 it is a call. But if a
sentence, it is surely not the elliptical sentence: slabl of our

language. -as far as the first question goes you can call slab! A

word and also a sentence; perhaps it could be appropriately called a
degenerate sentence (as one speaks of a degenerate hyperbola);
in fact it is our elliptical sentence. But that is surely only a shortened
form of the sentence bring me a slab, and there is no such sentence in
example (2). But why should i not on the contrary have called the
sentence bring me a slab a lengthening of the sentence slab! ?
Because if you shout slab! You really mean: bring me a slab.
But how do you do this: how do you mean that while you say slabl?
Do you say the unshortened sentence to yourself? And why should i
translate the call slab! Into a different expression in order to say

philosophical investigations i 9 e

what someone means by it? And if they mean the samp thingwhy
should i not say: when he says slab! Hemeans slab! ? Again, if you
can mean bring me the slab, why should you not be able to mp fl n
slab 1 ? -but when i call slab i, then what i want is, that he should

bring me a slab\ -certainly, but does wanting this consist in thinking

in some form or other a different sentence from the one you utter?

20. But now it looks as if when someone says bring me a slab he
could mean this expression as one long word corresponding to the single

word slabl-then can one mean it sometimes as one word and

sometimes as four? And how does one usually mean it? -1 think

we shall be inclined to say: we mean the sentence as four words when we
use it in contrast with other sentences such as hand me a slab,
bring him a slab, bring two slabs, etc. ; that is, in contrast with
sentences containing the separate words of our command in other
combinations. -but what does using one sentence in contrast with
others consist in? Do the others, perhaps, hover before ones mind?
All of them? And while one is saying the one sentence, or before, or
afterwards? No. Even if such an explanation rather tempts us/we
need only think for a moment of what actually happens in order to see
that we are going astray here. We say that we use the command in
contrast with other sentences because our language contains the pos
sibility of those other sentences. Someone who did not understand our
language, a foreigner, who had fairly often heard someone giving the
order: bring me a slabl, might believe that this whole series of
sounds was one word corresponding perhaps to the word for
building-stone  in his language. If he himself had then given this
order perhaps he would have pronounced it differently, and we should

say: he pronounces it so oddly because he takes it for a single word. _

but then, is there not also something, different going on in him when he
pronounces it, something corresponding to the fact that he con
ceives the sentence as a single word? -either the same thing may go

on in him, or something different. For what goes on in you when you
give such an order? Are you conscious of its consisting of four words
while you are uttering it? Of course you have a mastery of this language
which contains those other sentences as wellbut is this having a
mastery something that happens while you are uttering the sentence?
And i have admitted that the foreigner will probably pronounce a
sentence differently if he conceives it differently; but what we call
his wrong conception need not lie in anything that acco mpanies the
utterance of the c omman d.

Ioe philosophical investigations i

the sentence is elliptical, not because it leaves out something that
we think when we utter it, but because it is shortenedin comparison
with a particular paradigm of our grammar. Of course one might
object here: you grant that the shortened and the unshortened
sentence have the same sense. What is this sense, then? Isnt there a
verbal expression for this sense? -but doesnt the fact that sen

tences have the same sense consist in their having the same use }(in
russian one says stone red instead of the stone is red; do they feel
the copula to be missing in the sense, or attach it in thought})

21. Imagine a language-game in which a asks and b reports the
number of slabs or blocks in a pile, or the colours and shapes of the
building-stones that are stacked in such-and-such a place. Such a
report might run: five slabs. Now what is the difference between
the report or statement five slabs and the order five slabs! ?
Well, it is the part which uttering these words plays in the language-
game. No doubt the tone of voice and the look with which they are
uttered, and much else besides, will also be different. But we could
also imagine the tones being the samefor an order and a report
can be spoken in a variety of tones of voice and with various expressions
of facethe difference being only in the application. (of course, we
might use the words statement and command to stand for
grammatical forms of sentence and intonations; we do in fact call
isnt the weather glorious to-day? A question, although it is used as a
statement. ) we could imagine a language in which all statements had
the form and tone of rhetorical questions; or every command the form
of the question would you like to . . . ?. Perhaps it will then be said:
what he says has the form of a question but is really a command,
that is, has die function of a command in the technique of using the
language. (similarly one says you will do this not as a prophecy
but as a command. What mak^s it the one or the other? )

22. Freges idea that every assertion contains an assumption, which
is the thing that is asserted, really rests on the possibility found in our
language of writing every statement in the form: it is asserted that
such-and-such is the case. But that such-and-such is the case is
not a sentence in our languageso far it is not a move in the language-

game. And if i write, not it is asserted that-, but it is asserted:

such-and-such is the case, the words it is asserted simply become
superfluous.

We might very well also write every statement in the form of a

philosophical investigations i

ii

question followed by a yes; for instance: is it raining? Yes!
Would this shew that every statement contained a question?

Of course we have the right to use an assertion sign in contrast with
a question-mark, for example, or if we want to distinguish an assertion
from a fiction or a supposition. If is only a mistake if one thinks that
the assertion consists of two actions, entertaining and asserting
(assigning the truth-value, or something of the kind), and that in
performing these actions we follow the propositional sign roughly as
we sing from the musical score. Reading the written sentence loud or
soft is indeed comparable with singing from a musical score, but
c meaning 9 (thinking) the sentence that is read is not.

Freges assertion sign marks the beginning of the sentence . Thus its
function is like that of the full-stop. It distinguishes the whole period
v from a clause within the period. If i hear someone say its raining but
do not know whether i have heard the beginning and end of the
period, so far this sentence does not serve to tell me anything.

23. But how many kinds of sentence are there? Say assertion,
question, and command? There are countless kinds: countless different
kinds of use of what we call symbols, words, sentences. And
this multiplicity is not something fixed, given once for all; but new
types of language, new language-games, as we may say, come into
existence, and others become obsolete and get forgotten. (we can get a
rough picture of this from the changes in mathematics. )

here the term language-^/** is meant to bring into prominence
the fact that the speaking of language is part of an activity, or of a form
of life.

Review the multiplicity of language-games in the following
examples, and in others:

giving orders, and obeying them

describing the appearance of an object, or giving its measurements
constructing an object from a description (a drawing)
reporting an event

speculating about an event

imagine a picture representing a boxer in a particular stance. Now,
this picture can be used to tell someone how he should stand, should
hold himself; or how he should not hold himself; or how a particular
man did stand in such-and-such a place; and so on. One might (using
the language of chemistry) call this picture a proposition-radical.
This will be how frege thought of the assumption.

Philosophical investigations i

12

forming and testing a hypothesis

presenting the results of an experiment in tables and diagrams
making up a story; and reading it

play-acting

singing catches

guessing riddles

making a joke; telling it

solving a problem in practical arithmetic

translating from one language into another

asking, thanking, cursing, greeting, praying.

It is interesting to compare the multiplicity of the tools in language
and of the ways they are used, the multiplicity of kinds of word and
sentence, with what logicians have said about the structure of language.
(including the author of the tractatus logico-philosophicus . )

24. If you do not keep the multiplicity of language-games in view
yon will perhaps be inclined to ask questions like: what is a question?
Is it the statement that i do not know such-and-such, or the state
ment that i wish the other person would tell me . . . . ? Or is it the
description of my mental state of uncertainty? And is the cry help i
such a description?

Think how many different kinds of thing are called description:
description of a bodys position bymeans of its co-ordinates; description
of a facial expression; description of a sensation of touch; of a mood.

Of course it is possible to substitute the form of statement or
description for the usual form of question: i want to know whether
. . . Or i am in doubt whether . . . . But this does not bring the
different language-games any closer together.

The significance of such possibilities of transformation, for example
of turning all statements into sentences beginning i think or i
believe (and thus, as it were, into descriptions of my inner life) will
become clearer in another place. (solipsism. )

25. It is sometimes said that animals do not talk because they lack
the mental capacity. And this means: they do not think, and that is
why they do not talk. Butthey simply do not talk. Or to put it
better: they do not use languageif we except the most primitive forms
of language. Commanding, questioning, recounting, chatting, are as
much a part of our natural history as walking, eating, drinking, playing.

26. One thinks that learning language consists in giving names to
objects. Viz, to human beings, to shapes, to colours, to. Pains, to

philosophical investigations i

*3

moods, to numbers, etc.. To repeatnaming is something like
attaching a label to a thing. One can say that this is preparatory to the
use of a word. But what is it a preparation fori

27. "we name things and then we can talk about them: can refer
to them in talk. As if what we did next were given with the mere
act of naming. As if there were only one thing called "talking about a
thing. Whereas in fact we do the most various things with our
sentences. Think of exclamations alone, with their completely different
functions.

Water!

Away!

Ow!

Help!

Fine!

No!

Are you inclined still to call these words "names of objects?

In languages (2) and (8) there was no such thing as asking
somethings name. This, with its correlate, ostensive definition, is, we
might say, a language-game on its own. That is really to say: we are
brought up, trained, to ask: "what is that called? Upon which the
name is given. And there is also a language-game of inventing a name
for something, and hence of saying, "this is . . . . And then using the
new name. (thus, for example, children give names to their dolls
and then talk about them and to them. Think in this connexion how
singular is the use of a persons name to call him! )

. 28. Now one can ostensively define a proper name, the name of a
colour, the name of a material, a numeral, the name of a point of the
compass and so on. The definition of the number two, "that is called
two pointing to two nutsis perfectly exact. But how can two be
defined like that? The person one gives the definition to doesnt know
what one wants to call "two; he will suppose that "two is the name

given to this group of nuts! -he may suppose this; but perhaps he

does not. He might make the opposite mistake; when i want to assign
a name to this group of nuts, he might understand it as a numeral. And
he might equally well take the name of a person, of which i give an
ostensive definition, as that of a colour, of a race, or even of a point

philosophical investigations i

14

of the compass. That is to say: an o stensive definition can be variously
inter preted in every case.

29. Perhaps you say: two can only be ostensively defined in this
way: this number is called two* for the word number here
shews what place in language, in grammar, ' we assign to the word.
But this means that the word number must be explained before the
ostensive definition can be understood. The word number in the
definition does indeed shew this place; does shew the post at which we
station the word. And we can prevent misunderstandings by saying:
this colour is called so-and-so, this length is called so-and-so,
and so on. That is to say: misunderstandings are sometimes averted in
this way. But is there only one way of taking the word colour or
length? Well, they just need defining. Defining, then, by means
of other words! And what about the last definition in this chain?
(do not say: there isnt a last definition. That is just as if you chose
to say: there isnt a last house in this road; one can always build an
additional one. )

whether the word number is necessary in the ostensive definition
depends on whether without it the other person takes the definition
otherwise than i wish. And that will depend on the circumstances
under which it is given, and on the person i give it to.

And how he takes the definition is seen in the use that he makes of
the word defined.

30. So one might say: the ostensive definition explains the use
the meaningof the word when the overall role of the word in
language is clear. Thus if i know that someone means to explain a
colour-word to me the ostensive definition that is called sepia 
will help me to understand the word. And you can say this, so long as

could one define the word red by pointing to something that was
not red?. That would be as if one were supposed to explain the word
modest to someone whose english was weak, and one pointed to
an arrogant man and said that man is not modest. That
it is ambiguous is no argument against such a method of definition.
Any definition can be misunderstood.

But it might well be asked: are we still to call this definition?
For, of course, even if it has the same practical consequences, the same
effect on the learner, it plays a different part in the calculus from what we
ordinarily call ostensive definition of the word red.

Philosophical investigations i 15.

You do not forget that all sorts of problems attach to the words to
know or to be dear.

One has already to know (or be able to do) something in order to be
capable of asking a things name. But what does one have to know?

31. When one shews someone the king in chess and says: this is
the king, this does not tell him the use of this pieceunless he already
knows the rules of the game up to this last point: the shape of the king.
You could imagine his having learnt the rules of the game without ever
having been shewn an actual piece. The shape of the chessman cor
responds here to the sound or shape of a word.

One can also imagine someones having learnt the game without
ever learning or formulating rules. He might have learnt quite simple
board-games first, by watching, and have progressed to more and
more complicated ones. He too might be given the explanation this
is die king, if, for instance, he were being shewn chessmen of a shape
he was not used to. This explanation again only tells him the use
of the piece because, as we might say, the place for it was already
prepared. Or even: we shall only say that it tells him the use, if
the place is already prepared. And in this case it is so, not because the
person to whom we give the explanation already knows rules, but
because in another sense he is already master of a game.

Consider this farther case: i am explaining chess to someone; and i
begin by pointing to a chessman and saying: this is the king; it
canjtnove like this, .... And so on. In this case we shall say: the
words this is the king (or this is called the king* ) are a definition
only if the learner already knows what a piece in a game is\ that is,
if he has already played other games, or has watched other people
playing and understood *and similar things . Further, only under these
conditions will he be able to ask relevantly in the course of learning the
game: what do you call this? That is, this piece in a game.

We may say: only someone who already knows how to do something
with it can significantly ask a name.

And we can imagine the person who is asked replying: settle the
name yourselfand now die one who asked would have to manage
everything for himself.

52. Someone coming into a strange country will sometimes learn
the language of the inhabitants from ostensive definitions that they
give him; and he will often have to guess the meaning of these
definitions; and will guess sometimes right, sometimes wrong.

And now, i think, we can say: augustine describes the learning

philosophical investigations i

i6 e

of human language as if the child came into a strange country and
did not understand the language of the country; that is, as if it already
had a language, only not this one. Or again: as if the child could already
tbinky only not yet speak. And think would here mean something
like talk to itself.

33. Suppose, however, someone were to object: it is not true
that you must already be master of a language in order to understand
an ostensive definition: all you needof course! Is to know or
guess what the person giving the explanation is pointing to. That is,
whether for example to the shape of the object, or to its colour, or to its

number, and so on. -and what does pointing to the shape,

pointing to the colour consist in? Point to a piece of paper. And now
point to its shapenow to its colournow to its number (that sounds
queer). How did you do it? You will say that you meant a different
thing each time you pointed. And if i ask how that is done, you will
say you concentrated your attention on the colour, the shape, etc.
But i ask again: how is that done?

Suppose someone points to a vase and says look at that marvellous
bluethe shape isnt the point. Or: look at the marvellous shape
the colour doesnt matter. Without doubt you will do something
different when you act upon these two invitations. But do you always
do the same thing when you direct your attention to the colour?
Imagine various different cases. To indicate a few:

is this blue the same as the blue over there? Do you see any
difference?

You are mixing paint and you say its hard to get the blue of this
sky.

Its turning fine, you can already see blue sky again.

Look what different effects these two blues have.

Do you see the blue book over there? Bring it here.

This blue signal-light means . . . .

Whats this blue called? Is it indigo?

You sometimes attend to the colour by putting your hand up to keep
the outline from view; or by not looking at the outline of die thing;
sometimes by staring at the object and trying to remember where you
saw that colour before.

You attend to the shape, sometimes by tracing it, sometimes by
screwing up your eyes so as not to see the colour clearly, and in many
other ways. I want to say: this is the sort of thing that happens while
one directs ones attention to this or that. But it isnt these things by

philosophical investigations i

i r

themselves that make us say someone is attending to the shape, the
colour, and so on. Just as a move in chess doesn't consist simply in
moving a piece in such-and-such a way on the boardnor yet in one's
thoughts and feelings as one makes the move: but in the circumstances
that we call playing a game of chess, solving a chess problem,
and so on.

34. But suppose someone said: i always do the same thing when
i attend to the shape: my eye follows the outline and i feel . . .
And suppose this person to give someone else the ostensive definition
that is called a circle , pointing to a circular object and having all

these experiences-cannot his hearer still interpret the definition

differently, even though he sees the others eyes following the outline,
and even though he feels what the other feels? That is to say: this
interpretation may also consist in how he now makes use of the
word; in what he points to, for example, when told: point to a
circle. For neither the expression to intend the definition in such-
and-such a way nor the expression to interpret the definition in
such-and-such a way stands for a process which accompanies the
giving and hearing of the definition.

35. There are, of course, what can be called characteristic ex
periences of pointing to (e. G. ) the shape. For example, following
the outline with ones finger or with ones eyes as one points. But this
does not happen in all cases in which i mean the shape, and no more
does any other one characteristic process occur in all these cases.
Besides, even if something of the sort did recur in all cases, it would
still depend on the circumstancesthat is, on what happened before
and after the pointingwhether we should say he pointed to the
shape and not to the colour.

For the words to point to the shape, to mean the shape, and
so on, are not used in the same way as these : to point to this book
(not to that one), to point to the chair, not to the table, and so on.
Only think how differently we learn the use of the words to point
to this thing, to point to that thing, and on the other hand to
point to the colour, not the shape, to mean the colour, and so on.

To repeat: in certain cases, especially when one points to the shape
or to the number there are characteristic experiences and ways of
pointingcharacteristic because they recur often (not always) when
shape or number are meant. But do you also know of an experience
characteristic of pointing to a piece in a game as a piece in a game ?

Philosophical investigations i

18 e

all the same one can say: i mean that this piece is called the king,
not this particular bit of wood i am pointing to. (recognizing,
wishing, remembering, etc. . )

36. And we do here what we do in a host of similar cases: because
we cannot specify any one bodily action which we call pointing to the
shape (as opposed, for example, to the colour), we say that a spiritual
[mental, intellectual] activity corresponds to these words.

Where our language suggests a body and there is none: there,
we should like to say, is a spirit.

37. What is the relation between name and thing named? Well,
what is it? Look at language-game (2) or at another one: there you
can see the sort of thing this relation consists in. This relation may
also consist, among many other things, in the fact that hearing the
name calls before our mind the picture of what is named; and it also
consists, among other things, in the names being written on the thing
named or being pronounced when that thing is pointed at.

38. But what, for example, is the word this the name of in
language-game (8) or the word that in the ostensive definition
that is called . . . . ? If you do not want to produce confusion you
will do best not to call these words names at all. Yet, strange to say,
the word this has been called the only genuine name; so that anything
else we call a name was one only in an inexact, approximate sense.

This queer conception springs from a tendency to sublime the logic
of our languageas one might put it. The proper answer to it is: we
call very different things names; the word name is used to

what is it to mean the words that is blue at one time as a statement
about the object one is pointing toat another as an explanation of
the word blue? Well, in the second case one really means that is
called blue . Then can one at one time mean the word is as is
called and the word blue as  blue , and another time mean is
really as is?

It is also possible for someone to get an explanation of the words
out of what was intended as a piece of information. [marginal note:
here lurks a crucial superstition. ]

can i say bububu and mean if it doesnt rain i shall go for a
walk? It is only in a language that i can mean something by some
thing. This shews clearly that the grammar of to mean is not like
that of the expression to imagine and the like.

Philosophical investigations i

i 9 e

characterize many different kinds of use of a word, related to one
another in many different ways; but the kind of use that this has
is not among them.

It is quite true that, in giving an ostensive definition for instance,
we often point to the object named and say the name. And similarly,
in giving an ostensive definition for instance, we say the word this
while pointing to a thing. And also the word this and a name
often occupy the same position in a sentence. But it is precisely
characteristic of a name that it is defined by means of the demonstra
tive expression that is n (or that is called n ). But do we also
give the definitions: that is called this , or this is called this ?

This is connected with the conception of naming as, so to speak,
an occult process. Naming appears as a queer connexion of a word
with an object. And you really get such a queer connexion when the
philosopher tries to bring out the relation between name and thing by
staring at an object in front of him and repeating a name or even the
word this innumerable times. For philosophical problems arise
when language goes on holid ay. And here we may indeed fancy naming
to be some remarkable act of mind, as it were a baptism of an object.
And we can also say the word this to the object, as it were
address the object as thisa queer use of this word, which doubtless
only occurs in doing philosophy.

39. But why does it occur to one to want to make precisely this
word into a name, when it evidently is not a name? That is just the
reason. For one is tempted to make an objection against what is
ordinarily called a name. It can be put like this: a name ought really to
signify a simple . And for this one might perhaps give the following
reasons: the word excalibur, say, is a proper name in the ordinary
sense. The sword excalibur consists of parts combined in a particular
way. If they are combined differently excalibur does not exist. But
it is clear that the sentence excalibur has a sharp blade makes sense
whether excalibur is still whole or is broken up. But if excalibur is
the name of an object, this object no longer exists when excalibur is
broken in pieces; and as no object would then correspond to the name
it would have no meaning. But then the sentence excalibur has a
sharp blade would contain a word that had no meaning, and hence
the sentence would be nonsense. But it does make sense; so there
must always be something corresponding to the words of which it
consists. So the word excalibur must disappear when the sense is

2oe philosophical investigations i

analysed and its place be taken by words which name simples. It will
be reasonable to call these words the real names.

40. Let us first discuss this point of the argument: that a word has
no meaning if nothing corresponds to it. It is important to note
that the word meaning is being used illicitly if it is used to signify
the thing that corresponds" to the word. That is to confound the
meaning of a name with the hearer of the name. When mr. N. N. Dies
one says that the bearer of the name dies, not that the meaning dies.
And it would be nonsensical to say that, for if the name ceased to
have meaning it would make no sense to say mr. N. N. Is dead. ""

41. In 15 we introduced proper names into language (8). Now
suppose that the tool with the name n is broken. Not knowing
this, a gives b the sign n. Has this sign meaning now or not?
What is b to do*when he is given it? We have not settled anything
about this. One might ask: what will he do? Well, perhaps he will
stand there at a loss, or shew a the pieces. Here one might say: n
has become meaningless; and this expression would mean that the
sign n no longer had a use in our language-game (unless we gave it a
new one). N might also become meaningless because, for whatever
reason, the tool was given another name and the sign n no longer
used in the language-game. But we could also imagine a convention
whereby b has to shake his head in reply if a gives him the sign
belonging to a tool that is broken. In this way the command n
might be said to be given a place in the language-game even when the
tool no longer exists, and the sign n to have meaning even when
its bearer ceases to exist.

42. But has for instance a name which has never been used for a

tool also got a meaning in that game? -let us assume that x is

such a sign and that a gives this sign to bwell, even such signs could
be given a place in the language-game, and b might have, say, to
answer them too with a shake of the head. (one could imagine this
as a sort of joke between them. )

43. For a large class of casesthough not for allin which we
employ the word meaning it can be defined thus: the meaning of a
word is its use in the language.

Philosophical investigations i

21

and the meaning of a name is sometimes explained by pointing to its
bearer.

44. We said that the sentence excalibur has a sharp blade made
sense even when excalibur was broken in pieces. Now this is so
because in this language-game a name is also used in the absence of
its bearer. But we can imagine a language-game with names (that is,
with signs which we should certainly include among names) in which
they are used only in the presence of the bearer; and so could always be
replaced by a demonstrative pronoun and the gesture of pointing.

.45. The demonstrative this can never be without a bearer. It
might be said: so long as there is a this, the word this-has a meaning

too, whether this is simple or complex. -but that does not make

the word into a name. On the contrary: for a name is not used with,
but only explained by means of, the gesture of pointing.

46. What lies behind the idea that names really signify simples?

Socrates says in the theaetetus: if i make no mistake, i have heard

some people say this: there is no definition of the primary elements
so to speakout of which we and everything else are composed; for
everything that exists 1 in its own right can only be named , no other

determination is possible, neither that it is nor that it is not . But

what exists 1 in its own right has to be. Named without any other

determination. In consequence it is impossible to give an account of
any primary element; for it, nothing is possible but the bare name;
its name is all it has. But just as what consists of these primary elements
is itself complex, so the names of the elements become descriptive
language by being compounded together. For the essence of speech
is the composition of names.

Both russell's individuals' and my objects' (tractates logtco-
philosophicus) were such primary elements.

47. But what are the simple constituent parts of which reality is
composed? What are the simple constituent parts of a chair? The
bits of wood of which it is made? Or the molecules, or the atoms?
Simple means: not composite. And here the point is: in what sense
composite'? It makes no sense at all to speak absolutely of the simple
parts of a chair'.

1 1 have translated the german translation which wittgenstein used rather than the
original. Tr.

Philosophical investigations i

again: does my visual image of this tree, of this chair, consist of
parts? And what are its simple component parts? Multi-colouredness
is one kind of complexity; another is, for example, that of a broken
outline composed of straight bits. And a curve can be said to be com
posed of an ascending and a descending segment.

If i tell someone without any further explanation: what i see before
me now is composite, he will have the right to ask: what do you
mean by composite? For there are all sorts of things that that can
meanlthe question is what you see composite? Makes good
sense if it is already established what kind of complexitythat is,
which particular use of the wordis in question. If it had been laid
down that the visual image of a tree was to be called composite if
one saw not just a single trunk, but also branches, then the question
is the visual image of this tree simple or composite? , and the
question what are its simple component parts? , would have a clear
sensea clear use. And of course the answer to the second question
is not the branches (that would be an answer to the grammatical
question: what are here called simple component parts? ) but rather
a description of the individual branches.

But isnt a chessboard, for instance, obviously, and absolutely,
composite? You are probably thinking of the composition out of
thirty-two white and thirty-two black squares. But could we not also
say, for instance, that it was composed of the colours black and white
and the schema of squares? And if there are quite different ways of
looking at it, do you still want to say that the chessboard is absolutely
composite? Asking is this object composite? Outside a particular
language-game is like what a boy once did, who had to say whether
the verbs in certain sentences were in the active or passive voice, and
who racked his brains over the question whether the verb to sleep
meant something active' or passive.

We use the word composite (and therefore the word simple)
in an enormous number of different and differently related ways.
(is the colour of a square on a chessboard simple, or does it consist
of pure white and pure yellow? And is white simple, or does it consist
of the colours of the rainbow? Is this length of 2 cm. Simple, or does
it consist of two parts, each 1 cm. Long? But why not of one bit
j cm. Long, and one bit 1 cm. Long measured in the opposite direction? )

to the philosophical question: is the visual image of this tree

philosophical investigations i

23'

composite, and what are its component parts? The correct answer is:
that depends on what you understand by composite. (and that is
of course not an answer but a rejection of the question. )

48. Let us apply the method of 2 to the account in the theaefetus.
Let us consider a language-game for which this account is really valid.
The language serves to describe combinations of coloured squares
on a surface. The squares form a complex like a chessboard. There
are red, green, white and black squares. The words of the language are
(correspondingly) r, g, w, b, and a sentence is a series of
these words. They describe an arrangement of squares in the order:

i

2

j

4

5

6

7

8

9

and so for instance the sentence rrbgggrww describes an
arrangement of this sort:

here the sentence is a complex of names, to which corresponds a
complex of elements. The primary elements are the coloured squares.
But are these simple? I do not know what else you would have me
call the simples, what would be more natural in this language-game.
But under other circumstances i should call a monochrome square
composite, consisting perhaps of two rectangles, or of the elements
colour and shape. But the concept of complexity might also be so
extended that a smaller area was said to be composed of a greater
area and another one subtracted from it. Compare the composition of

*4 e

philosophical investigations i

forces*, the division* of a line by a point outside it; these expressions
shew that we are sometimes even inclined to conceive the smaller
as the result of a composition of greater parts, and the greater as the
result of a division of the smaller.

But i do not know whether to say that the figure described by our
sentence consists of four or of nine elements! Well, does the sentence
consist of four letters or of nine? And which are its elements, the
types of letter, or the letters? Does it matter which we say, so long as
we avoid misunderstandings in any particular case?

49. But what does it mean to say that we cannot define (that is,
describe) these elements, but only name them? This might mean, for
instance, that when in a limiting case a complex consists of only one
square, its description is simply the name of the coloured square.

Here we might saythough this easily leads to all kinds of philo
sophical superstitionthat a sign r** or b**, etc. May be sometimes
a word and sometimes a proposition. But whether it is a word or a
proposition* depends on die situation in which it is uttered or written.
For instance, if a has to describe complexes of coloured squares to b
and he uses the word r** alone> we shall be able to say that the word
is a descriptiona proposition. But if he is memorizing the words
and their meanings, or if he is teaching someone else the use of the
words and uttering them in the course of ostensive teaching, we shall
not say that they are propositions. In this situation the word r,

for instance, is not a description; it names an element-but it would be

queer to make that a reason for saying that an element can only be
named! For naming and describing do not stand on the same
level: naming is a preparation for description. Naming is so far not a
move in the language-gameany more than putting a piece in its place
on the board is a move in chess. We may say: nothing has so far been
done, when a thing has been named. It has not even got a name except
in the language-game. This was what frege meant too, when he said
that a word had meaning only as part of a sentence.

J o. What does it mean to say that we can attribute neither being nor
non-being to elements? One might say: if everything that we call
being** and non-being** consists in the existence and non-existence of
connexions between elements, it makes no sense to speak of an elements
being (non-being); just as when everything that we call destruction**
lies in the separation of elements, it makes no sense to speak of the
destruction of an element.

Philosophical investigations i 25*

one would, however, like to say: existence cannot be attributed to
an element, for if it did not exists one could not even name it and so
one could say nothing at all of it. But let us consider an analogous
case. There is one thing of which one can say neither that it is one
metre long, nor that it is not one metre long, and that is the standard
metre in paris. But this is, of course, not to ascribe any extraordinary
property to it, but only to mark its peculiar role in the language-game
of measuring with a metre-rule. Let us imagine samples of colour
being preserved in paris like the standard metre. We define: sepia
means the colour of the standard sepia which is there kept hermetically
sealed. Then it will make no sense to say of this sample either that
it is of this colour or that it is not.

We can put it like this: this sample is an instrument of the language
used in ascriptions of colour. In this language-game it is not some
thing that is represented, but is a means of representation. And
just this goes for an element in language-game (48) when we name it
by uttering the word r: this gives this object a role in our language-
game; it is now a means of representation. And to say if it did not
exist , it could have no name is to say as much and as little as: if this
thing did not exist, we could not use it in our language-game. What
looks as if it had to exist, is part of. The language. It is a paradigm in our
language-game; something with which comparison is made. And this
may be an important observation; but it is none the less an observation
concerning our language-gameour method of representation.

51. In describing language-game (48) i said that the words r,
b, etc, corresponded to the colours of the squares. But what does
this correspondence consist in; in what sense can one say that certain
colours of squares correspond to these signs? For the account in (48)
merely set up a connexion between those signs and certain words of
our language (the names of colours). Well, it was presupposed that
the use of the signs in the language-game would be taughtin a different
way, in particular by pointing to paradigms. Very well; but what
does it mean to say that in the technique of using the language certain
elements correspond to the signs? Is it that the person who is describ
ing the complexes of coloured squares always says r where there is a
red square; b when there is a black one, and so on? But what if he
goes wrong in the description and mistakenly says r where he sees a

black square-what is the criterion by which this is a mistake ?

Or does rs standing for a red square consist in this, that when the

26 e

philosophical investigations i

people whose language it is use the sign r a red square always comes
before their minds?

In order to see more clearly, here as in countless similar cases, we
must focus on the details of what goes on; must look at them from
close to.

52. If i am inclined to suppose that a mouse has come into being
by spontaneous generation out of grey rags and dust, i shall do well
to examine those rags very closely to see how a mouse may have
hidden in them, how it may have got there and so on. But if i am
convinced that a mouse cannot come into being from these things,
then this investigation will perhaps be superfluous.

But first we must learn to understand what it is that opposes such
an examination of details in philosophy.

55. Our language-game (48) has various possibilities; there is a
variety of cases in which we should say that a sign in the game was
the name of a square of such-and-such a colour. We should say so
if, for instance, we knew that the people who used the language were
taught the use of the signs in such-and-such a way. Or if it were set
down in writing, say in the form of a table, that this element corres
ponded to this sign, and if the table were used in teaching the language
and were appealed to in certain disputed cases.

We can also imagine such a tables being a tool in the use of the
language. Describing a complex is then done like this: the person who
describes the complex has a table with him and looks up each element
of the complex in it and passes from this to the sign (and the one who
is given the description may also use a table to translate it into a
picture of coloured squares). This table might be said to take over here
the role of memory and association in other cases. (we do not usually
carry out the order bring me a red flower by looking up the colour
red in a table of colours and then bringing a flower of the colour that
we find in the table; but when it is a question of choosing or mixing
a particular shade of red, we do sometimes make use of a sample or
table. )

if we call such a table the expression of a rule of the language-game,
it can be said that what we call a rule of a language-game may have
very different roles in the game.

54. Let us recall the kinds of case where we say that a game is
played according to a definite rule.

Philosophical investigations i

27

the rule may be an aid in teaching the game. The learner is told it
and given practice in applying it. Or it is an instrument of the game
itself. Or a rule is employed neither in the teaching nor in the game
itself; nor is it set down in a list of rules. One learns the game by
watching how others play. But we say that it is played according to
such-and-such rules because an observer can read these rules off from

the practice of the gamelike a natural law governing the play. -

but how does the observer distinguish in this case between players*
mistakes and correct play? There are characteristic signs of it in the
players* behaviour. Think of the behaviour characteristic of correcting
a slip of the tongue. It would be possible to recognize that someone
was doing so even without knowing his language.

55. What the names in language signify must be indestructible;
for it must be possible to describe the state of affairs in which every
thing destructible is destroyed. And this description will contain
words; and what corresponds to these cannot then be destroyed, for
otherwise the words would have no meaning. ** i must not saw off the
branch on which i am sitting.

One might, of course, object at once that this description would have
to except itself from the destruction. But what corresponds to -the
separate words of the description and so cannot be destroyed if it is
true, is what gives the words their meaningis that without which

they would have no meaning. -in a sense, however, this man is

surely what corresponds to his name. But he is destructible, and his
name does not lose its meaning when the bearer is destroyed. An
example of something corresponding to the name, and without which
it would have no meaning, is a paradigm that is used in connexion with
the name in the language-game.

56. But what if no such sample is part of the language, and we

bear in mind the colour (for instance) that a word stands for? -and

if we bear it in mind then it comes before our mind*s eye when we
utter the word. So, if it is always supposed to be possible for us to

remember it, it must be in itself indestructible. **-but what do we

regard as the criterion for remembering it right? When we work
with a sample instead of our memory there are circumstances in which
we say that the sample has changed colour and we judge of this by
memory. But can we not sometimes speak of a darkening (for
example) of our memory-image? Arent we as much at the mercy of
memory as of a sample? (for someone might feel like saying: if we

280 philosophical investigations i

had no memory we should be at the mercy of a sample. )or perhaps
of some chemical reaction. Imagine that you were supposed to paint
a particular colour c, which was the colour that appeared when the
chemical substances x and y combined. Suppose that the colour
struck you as brighter on one day than on another; would you not
sometimes say: i must be wrong, the colour is certainly the same as
yesterday? This shews that we do not always resort to what memory
tells us as the verdict of the highest court of appeal.

5 7. Something red can be destroyed, but red cannot be destroyed,
and that is why the meaning of the word red is independent of the
existence of a red thing. Certainly it makes no sense to say that the
colour red is torn up or pounded to bits. But don't we say the red is
vanishing? And don't clutch at the idea of our always being able to
bring red before our mind's eye even when there is nothing red any
more. That is just as if you chose to say that there would still always
be a chemical reaction producing a red flame. For suppose you can
not remember the colour any more? When we forget which colour
this is the name of, it loses its meaning for us; that is, we are no longer
able to play a particular language-game with it. And the situation then
is comparable with that in which we have lost a paradigm which was an
instrument of our language.

58. I want to restrict the term  name ' to what cannot occur in
the combination x exists'. Thus one cannot say red exists', because
if there were no red it could not be spoken of at all. Better: if x
exists is meant simply to say: x has a meaning, then it is not a
proposition which treats of x, but a proposition about our use of
language, that is, about the use of the word x.

It looks to us as if we were saying something about the nature of
red in saying that the words red exists do not yield a sense. Namely
that red does exist in its own right'. The same ideathat this is a
metaphysical statement about redfinds expression again when we say
such a thing as that red is timeless, and perhaps still more strongly
in the word indestructible.

But what we really want is simply to take red exists as the state
ment: the word red has a meaning. Or perhaps better: red does
not exist as  red' has no meaning. Only we do not want to say
that that expression says this, but that this is what it would have to be
saying if it meant anything. But that it contradicts itself in the attempt

philosophical investigations i

29

to say itjust because red exists in its own right*. Whereas the only
contradiction lies in something like this: the proposition looks as if it
were about the colour, while it is supposed to be saying something
about the use of the word red. In reality, however, we quite
readily say that a particular colour exists; and that is as much as to say
that something exists that has that colour. And the first expression is
no less accurate than the second; particularly where what has the
colour* is not a physical object.

5 9. A name signifies only what is an element of reality. What cannot
be destroyed; what remains the same in all changes. **but what is
that? Why, it swam before our minds as we said the sentence!
This was the very expression of a quite particular image: of a particular
picture which we want to use. For certainly experience does not shew
us these elements. We see component parts of something composite (of
a chair, for instance). We say that the back is part of the chair, but
is in turn itself composed of several bits of wood; while a leg is a
simple component part.  We also see a whole which changes (is
destroyed) while its component parts remain unchanged. These are
the materials from which we construct that picture of reality.

60. When i say: my broom is in the corner**, is this really a
statement about the broomstick and the brush? Well, it could at any
rate be replaced by a statement giving the position of the stick and the
position of the brush. And this statement is surely a further analysed
form of the first one. But why do i call it further analysed*?
Well, if the broom is there, that surely means that the stick and brush
must be there, and in a particular relation to one another; and this
was as it were hidden in the sense of the first sentence, and is expressed
in the analysed sentence. Then does someone who says that the broom
is in the comer really mean: the broomstick is there, and so is the brush,
and the broomstick is fixed in the brush? If we were to ask anyone
if he meant this he would probably say that he had not thought
specially of the broomstick or . Specially of the brush at all. And that
would be the right answer, for he meant to speak neither of the stick
nor of the brush in particular. Suppose that, instead of saying bring
me the broom**, you said bring me the broomstick and the brush
which is fitted on to it. ** iisnt the answer: do you want the broom?

Why do you put it so oddly? **-is he going to understand the further

analysed sentence better? This sentence, one might say, achieves
the same as the ordinary one, but in a more roundabout way.

3 o philosophical investigations i

imagine a language-game in which someone is ordered to bring
certain objects which are composed of several parts, to move them
about, or something else of the kind. And two ways of playing it:
in one (a) the composite objects (brooms, chairs, tables, etc. ) have
names, as in (15); in the other (b) only the parts are given names and
the wholes are described by means of them. In what sense is an order
in the second game an analysed form of an order in the first? Does the
former lie concealed in the latter, and is it now brought out by analysis?
True, the broom is taken to pieces when one separates broomstick and
brush; but does it follow that the order to bring the broom also consists
of corresponding parts?

61. But all the same you will not deny that a particular order in
(a) means the same as one in (b); and what would you call the second
one, if not an analysed form of the first? Certainly i too should say
that an order in (a) had the same meaning as one in (b); or, as i
expressed it earlier: they achieve the same. And this means that if i
were shewn an order in (a) and asked: which order in (b) means the
same as this? Or again which order in (b) does this contradict? I
should give such-and-such an answer. But that is not to say that we
have come to a general agreement about the use of the expression to
have the same meaning or to achieve the same. For it can be asked
in what cases we say: these are merely two forms of the same game.

62. Suppose for instance that the person who is given the orders in
(a) and (b) has to look up a table co-ordinating names and pictures
before bringing what is required. Does he do the same when he carries
out an order in (a) and the corresponding one in (b)? Yes and no.
You may say: the point of the two orders is the same. I should say
so too. But it is not everywhere clear what should be called the point
of an order. (similarly one may say of certain objects that they have
this or that purpose. The essential thing is that this is a lamp , that it

serves to give light; -that it is an ornament to the room, fills an

empty space, etc. , is not essential. But there is not always a sharp
distinction between essential and inessential. )

63. To say, however, that a sentence in (b) is an analysed form
of one in (a) readily seduces us into thinking that the former is the
more fundamental form; that it alone shews what is meant by the other,
and so on. For example, we think: if you have only the unanalysed
form you miss the analysis; but if you know the analysed form that

philosophical investigations i 31"

gives you everything. But can i not say that an aspect of the matter is
lost on you in the latter case as well as the former?

64. Let us imagine language game (48) altered so that names signify
not monochrome squares but rectangles each consisting of two such
squares. Let such a rectangle, which is half red half green, be called
u; a half green half white one, v; and so on. Could we not
imagine people who had names for such combinations of colour, but
not for the individual colours? Think of the cases where we say:
t his arrangement of colours (say the french tricolor) has a quite
special character.

In what sense do the symbols of this language-game stand in need of
analy sis? How far is it even possible to replace this language-game by
(48)? It is just another language-game; even though it is related to (48).

65. Here we come up against the great question that lies behind
all these considerations. For someone might object against me:
you take the easy way out! You talk about all sorts of language-
games, but have nowhere said what the essence of a language-game,
and hence of language, is: what is common to all these activities,
and what makes them into language or parts of language. So you
let yourself off the very part of the investigation that once gave you
yourself most headache, the part about the general form of propositions
and of language.

And this is true. Instead of producing something common to
all tha t we call language, i am saying that these phenomena have no
one thing in common which makes us use the same word for all,
imt that they are related to one another in many different ways. And it
is because of this relationship, or these relationships, that we call them
all language. I will try to explain this.

66. Consider for example the proceedings that we call games.
I mean board-games, card-games, ball-games, olympic games, and
so on. What is common to them all? Dont say: there must be
something common, or they would not be called games but
look and see whether there is anything common to all. For if you look
at them you will not see something that is common to all, but
gimilariries , relationships, and a whole series of them at that. To
repeat: dont think, but look! Look for example at board-games,
with their multifarious relationships. Now pass to card-games; here
you find many correspondences with the first group, but many common

philosophical investigations i

3* e

features drop out, and others appear. When we pass next to ball-
games, much that is common is retained, but much is lost. Are they
all amusing? Compare chess with noughts and crosses. Or is there
always winning and losing, or competition between players? Think
of patience. In ball games there is winning and losing; but when a
child throws his ball at the wall and catches it again, this feature has
disappeared. Look at the parts played by skill and luck; and at the
difference between skill in chess and skill in tennis. Think now of
games like ring-a-ring-a-roses; here is the element of amusement,
but how many other characteristic features have disappeared! And
we can go through the many, many other groups of games in the same
way; can see how similarities crop up and disappear.

And the result of this examination is: we see a complicated network
of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing: sometimes overall
similarities, sometimes similarities of detail.

67. I can think of no better expression to characterize these
similarities than family resemblances; for the various resemblances
between members of a family: build, features, colour of eyes, gait,
temperament, etc. Etc. Overlap and criss-cross in the same way.
And i shall say: games form a family.

And for instance the kinds of number form a family in the same way.
Why do we call something a number? Well, perhaps because it
has adirectrelationship with several things that have hitherto
been called number; and this can be said to give it an indirect relation
ship to other things we call the same name. And we extend our con
cept of number as in spinning a thread we twist fibre on fibre. And
the strength of the thread does not reside in the fact that some one
fibre runs through its whole length, but in the overlapping of many
fibres.

But if someone wished to say: there is something common to all
these constructionsnamely the disjunction of all their common
propertiesi should reply: now you are only playing with words.
One might as well say: something runs through the whole thread
namely the continuous overlapping of those fibres.

68. All right: the concept of number is defined for you as the
logical sum of these individual interrelated concepts: cardinal numbers,
rational numbers, real numbers, etc. ; and in the same way the concept
of a game as the logical sum of a corresponding set of sub-concepts.
It need not be so. For i can give the concept number rigid limits

philosophical investigations i

53 *

in this way, that is, use the word number for a rigidly limited con
cept, but i can also use it so that the extension of the concept is not
closed by a frontier. And this is how we do use the word game.
For how is the concept of a game bounded? What still counts as a
game and what no longer does? Can you give the boundary? No.
You can draw one; for none has so far been drawn. (but that never
troubled you before when you used the word game. )

but then the use of the word is unregulated, the game we play

with it is unregulated. -it is not everywhere circumscribed by

rules; but no more are there any rules for how high one throws the
ball in tennis, or how hard; yet tennis is a game for all that and has
rules too.

69. How should we explain to someone what a game is? I imagine
that we should describe games to him, and we might add: this and
similar things are called games* . And do we know any more about
it ourselves? Is it only other people whom we cannot tell exactly what
a game is? But this is not ignorance. We do not know the boundaries
because none have been drawn. To repeat, we can draw a boundary
for a special purpose. Does it take that to make the concept usable?
Not at all! (except for that special purpose. ) no more than it took
the definition: 1 pace = 75 cm. To make the measure of length one
pace* usable. And if you want to say but still, before that it wasnt
an exact measure, then i reply: very well, it was an inexact one.
Though you still owe me a definition of exactness.

70. But if the concept game* is uncircumscribed like that, you

dont really know what you mean by a game. *-when i give the

description: the ground was quite; covered with plantsdo you
want to say i dont know what i am talking about until i can give a
definition of a plant?

My meaning would be explained by, say, a drawing and the words
the ground looked roughly like this. Perhaps i even say it looked
exactly like this. Then were just this grass and these leaves there,
arranged just like this? No, that is not what it means. And i should
not accept any picture as exact in this sense.

Someone says to me: shew the children a game. I teach them
gaming with dice, and the other says i didnt mean that sort of
game. Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before
his mind when he gave me the order?

34

philosophical investigations i

71. One might say that the concept game is a concept with blurted
edges. But is a blurred concept a concept at all? Is an indistinct
photograph a picture of a person at all? Is it even always an advantage
to replace an indistinct picture by a sharp one? Isnt the indistinct one
often exactly what we need?

Frege compares a concept to an area and says that an area with
vague boundaries cannot be called an area at all. This presumably
means that we cannot do anything with it. But is it senseless to say:
stand roughly there? Suppose that i were standing with someone
in a city square and said that. As i say it i do not draw any kind of
boundary, but perhaps point with my handas if i were indicating a
particular spot. And this is just how one might explain to someone
what a game is. One gives examples and intends diem to be taken
in a particular way. I do not, however, mean by this that he is
supposed to see in those examples that common thing which ifor
some reasonwas unable to express; but that he is now to employ
those examples in a particular way. Here giving examples is not an
indirect means of explainingin default of a better. For any general
definition can be misunderstood too. The point is that this is how we
play the game. (i mean the language-game with the word game. )

72. Seeing what is common. Suppose i shew someone various multi
coloured pictures, and say: the colour you see in all these is called
yellow ochre . This is a definition, and the other will get to under
stand it by looking for and seeing what is common to the pictures.
Then he can look at, can point to, the common thing.

Compare with this a case in which i shew him figures of different
shapes all painted the same colour, and say: what these have in
common is called yellow ochre .

And compare this case: i shew him samples of different shades of
blue and say: the colour that is common to all these is what i call
blue .

7j. When someone defines the names of colours for me by point
ing to samples and saying this colour is called blue, this

green. This case can be compared in many respects to putting

a table in my hands, with the words written under the colour-samples.
Though this comparison may mislead in many ways. One is now
inclined to extend the comparison: to have understood the definition
means to have in ones mind an idea of the thing defined, and that is a
sample or picture. So if i am shewn various different leaves and told

philosophical investigations i

35 e

this is called a leaf , i get an idea of the shape of a leaf, a picture
of it in my mind. But what does the picture of a leaf look like
when it does not shew us any particular shape, but what is common
to all shapes of leaf"? Which shade is the sample in my mind of the
colour greenthe sample of what is common to all shades of green?

But might there not be such general samples? Say a schematic
leaf, or a sample of pure green? Certainly there might. But for
such a schema to be understood as a schema , and not as the shape of a
particular leaf, and for a slip of pure green to be understood as a
sample of all that is greenish and not as a sample of pure greenthis
in turn resides in the way the samples are used.

Ask yourself: what shape must the sample of the colour green be?
Should it be rectangular? Or would it then be the sample of a green
rectangle? So should it be irregular in shape? And what is to
prevent us then from regarding itthat is, from using itonly as a
sample of irregularity of shape?

74. Here also belongs the idea that if you see this leaf as a sample
of leaf shape in general you see it differently from someone who
regards it as, say, a sample of this particular shape. Now this might
well be sothough it is not sofor it would only be to say that, as a
matter of experience, if you see the leaf in a particular way, you use it
in such-and-such a way or according to such-and-such rules. Of course,
there is such a thing as seeing in this way or that ; and there are also
cases where whoever sees a sample like this will in general use it in
this way, and whoever sees it otherwise in another way. For example,
if you see the schematic drawing of a cube as a plane figure consisting
of a square and two rhombi you will, perhaps, carry out the order
bring me something like this differently from someone who sees
the picture three-dimensionally.

75. What does it mean to know what a game is? What does it
mean, to know it and not be able to say it? Is this knowledge some
how equivalent to an unformulated definition? So that if it were
formulated i should be able to recognize it as the expression of my
knowledge? Isnt my knowledge, my concept of a game, completely
expressed in the explanations that i could give? That is, in my describ
ing examples of various kinds of game; shewing how all sorts of other
games can be constructed on the analogy of these; saying that i should
scarcely include this or this among games; and so on.

3 6  philosophical investigations i

76. If someone were to draw a sharp boundary i could not acknow
ledge it as the one that i too always wanted to draw, or had drawn in
my mind. For i did not want to draw one at all. His concept can then
be said to be not the same as mine, but akin to it. The kinship is
that of two pictures, one of which consists of colour patches with
vague contours, and the other of patches similarly shaped and dis
tributed, but with clear contours. The kinship is just as undeniable as
the difference.

77. And if we carry this comparison still further it is clear that the
degree to which the sharp picture can resemble the blurred one depends
on the latters degree of vagueness. For imagine having to sketch a
sharply defined picture corresponding to a blurred one. In the latter
there is a blurred red rectangle: for it you put down a sharply defined
one. Of courseseveral such sharply defined rectangles can be drawn
to correspond to the indefinite one. But if the colours in the original
merge without a hint of any outline wont it become a hopeless task
to draw a sharp picture corresponding to the blurred one? Wont
you then have to say: here i might just as well draw a circle or heart
as a rectangle, for all the colours merge. Anythingand nothingis

right. -and this is the position you are in if you look for definitions

corresponding to our concepts in aesthetics or ethics.

In such a difficulty always ask yourself: how did we learn the mean
ing of this word (good for instance)? From what sort of examples?
In what language-games? Then it will be easier for you to see that the
word must have a family of meanings.

78. Compare knowing and saying:

how many feet high mont blanc is
how the word game is used
how a clarinet sounds.

If you are surprised that one can know something and not be able
to say it, you are perhaps thinking of a case like the first. Certainly not
of one like the third.

79. Consider this example. If one says moses did not exist,
this may mean various things. It may mean: the israelites did not

have a single leader when they withdrew from egypt-or: their

leader was not called moses-or: there cannot have been anyone

who accomplished all that the bible relates of moses-or: etc. Etc.

We may say, following russell: the name moses can be defined by

philosophical investigations i

37

means of various descriptions. For example, as the man who led the
israelites through the wilderness, the man who lived at that time
and place and was then called moses , the man who as a child was
taken out of the nile by pharaohs daughter and so on. And accord
ing as we assume one definition or another the proposition moses
did not exist acquires a different sense, and so does every other
proposition about moses. And if we are told n did not exist, we do
ask: what do you mean? Do you want to say...... Or. Etc. ?

But when i make a statement about moses, am i always ready tct
substitute some one of these descriptions for moses? I shall perhaps
say: by moses i understand the man who did what the bible relates
of moses, or at any rate a good deal of it. But how much? Jhl ave i
decided how much must be proved false for m e to giv e up my proposi
tion as false? Has the name moses got a fixed and unequivocal use
formem alt possible cases? Is it not the case that i have, so to speak ,
a whole series of props in readiness, and am ready to lean on one if

another should be taken from under me ancfvice versa; *- consider

another case. When i say n is dead, then something like the follow
ing may hold for the meaning of the name n: i believe that a human
being has lived, whom i (i) have seen in such-and-such places, who
(2) looked like this (pictures), (3) has done such-and-such things, and
(4) bore the name n in social life. Asked what i understand by
n, i should enumerate all or some of these points, and different ones
on different occasions. So my definition of n would perhaps be
the man of whom all this is true. But if some point now proves
false? Shall i be prepared to declare the proposition n is dead
falseeven if it is, only something which strikes me as incidental
that has turned out false? But where are the bounds of the incidental?
If i had given a definition of the name in such a case, i should now be
ready to alter it. ^

and this can be expressed like this: i use the name n without a
fixed meaning. (but that detracts as little from its usefulness, as it
detracts from that of a table that it stands on four legs instead of three
and so sometimes wobbles. )

should it be said that i am using a word whose meaning i dont
know, and so am talking nonsense? Say what you choose, so long
as it does not prevent you from seeing the facts. (and when you see
them there is a good deal that you will not say. )

(the fluctuation of scientific definitions: what to-day counts as an

philosophical investigations i

3

observed concomitant of a phenomenon will to-morrow be used to
define it. )

80. I say there is a chair. What if i go up to it, meaning to

fetch it, and it suddenly disappears from sight? -so it wasnt a chair,

but some kind of illusion. -but in a few moments we see it again

and are able to touch it and so on. -so the chair was there after all

and its disappearance was some kind of illusion. -but suppose that

after a time it disappears againor seems to disappear. What are we
to say now? Have you rules ready for such casesrules saying
whether one may use the word chair to include this kind of thing?
But do we miss them when we use the word chair; and are we to

/1 say that we do not really attach any meaning to this word, because we
/ afe~ not equipped~with rules for every possible application of it? ~

81. F. P. Ramsey once emphasized in conversation with me that
logic was a normative science. I do not know exactly what he had
in mind, but it was doubtless closely related to what only dawned on
me later: namely, that in philosophy we often compare the use of words
with games and calculi which have fixed rules, but cannot say

that someone who is using language must be playing such a game. -

but if you say that our languages only approximate to such calculi
you are standing on the very brink of a misunderstanding. For then
it may look as if what we were talking about were an ideal language.
As if our logic were, so to speak, a logic for a vacuum. Whereas logic
does not treat of languageor of thoughtin the sense in which a
natural science treats of a natural phenomenon, and the most that can
be said is that w ^construct ideal languages. But here the word ideal
is liable to mislead; for it sounds as if these languages were better, more
perfect, than our everyday, language; and as if it took the logician
to shew people at last what a proper sentence looked like.

All this, however, can only appear in the right light when one has
attained greater clarity about the concepts of understanding, meaning,
and thinking. For it will then also become clear what can lead us (and
did lead me) to think that if anyone utters a sentence and means or
understands it he is operating a calculus according to definite rules.

82. What do i call the rule by which he proceeds? The hypothesis
that satisfactorily describes his use of words, which we observe; or
the rule which he looks up when he uses signs; or the one which he

philosophical investigations i 39 e

gives us in reply if we ask him what his rule is? But what if observa
tion does not enable us to see any clear rule, and the question brings
none to light? For he did indeed give me a definition when i asked
him what he understood by n, but he was prepared to withdraw and
alter it. So how am i to determine the rule according to which he is
playing? He does not know it himself. Or, to ask a better question:
what meaning is the expression the rule by which he proceeds
supposed to have left to it here?

83. Doesnt the analogy between language and games throw light
here? We can easily imagine people amusing themselves in a field by
playing with a ball so as to start various existing games, but playing
many without finishing them and in between throwing the ball aim
lessly into the air, chasing one another with the ball and bombarding
one another for a joke and so on. And now someone says: the whole
time they are playing a ball-game and following definite rules at every
throw.

And is there not also the case where we play andmake up the rules
as we go along? And there is even one where we alter themas we go
along.

84. I said that the application of a word is not everywhere bounded
by rules. But what does a game look like that is everywhere bounded
by rules? Whose rules never let a doubt creep in, but stop up all
the cracks where it might? Cant we imagine a rule determining the
application of a rule, and a doubt which it removesand so on?

But that is not to say that we are in doubt because it is possible for
us to imagine a doubt. I can easily imagine someone always doubting
before he opened his front door whether an abyss did not yawn behind
it, and making sure about it before he went through the door (and
he might on some occasion prove to be right)but that does not
make me doubt in the same case.

85. A rule stands there like a sign-post. Does the sign-post leave
no doubt open about the way i have to go? Does it shew which
direction i am to take when i have passed it; whether along the road
or the footpath or cross-country? But where is it said which way i
am to follow it; whether in the direction of its finger or (e. G. ) in the
opposite one? And if there were, not a single sign-post, but a chain
of adjacent ones or of chalk marks on the groundis there only one

pay of interpreting them? So i can say, the sign-post does after all

philosophical investigations i

40 e

leave no room for doubt. Or rather: it sometimes leaves room for
doubt and sometimes not. And now this is no longer a philosophical
proposition, but an empirical one.

86. Imagine a language-game like (2) played with the help of a
table. The signs given to b by a are now written ones. B has a
table; in the first column are the signs used in the game, in the second
pictures of building stones. A shews b such a written sign; b looks it
up in the table, looks at the picture opposite, and so on. So the table is a
rule which he follows in executing orders. One learns to look the
picture up in the table by receiving a training, and part of this training
consists perhaps in the pupils learning to pass with his finger hori
zontally from left to right; and so, as it were, to draw a series of
horizontal lines on the table.

Suppose different ways of reading a table were now introduced;
one time, as above, according to the schema:



->

-

another time like this:

or in some other way. Such a schema is supplied with the table as
the rule for its use.

Can we not now imagine further rules to explain this one? And, on
the other hand, was that first table incomplete without the schema of
arrows? And are other tables incomplete without their schemata?

87. Suppose i give this explanation: i take moses to mean the
man, if there was such a man, who led the israelites out of egypt,
whatever he was called then and whatever he may or may not have
done besides. But similar doubts to those about moses are
possible about the words of this explanation (what are you calling
egypt, whom the israelites etc. ? ). Nor would these questions
come to an end when we got down to words like red, dark,
sweet. But then how does an explanation help me to under-

philosophical investigations i

41 

stand, if after all it is not the final one? In that case the explanation is
never completed; so i still dont understand what he means, and never
shall! As though an explanation as it were hung in the air unless
supported by another one. Whereas an explanation may indeed rest
on another one that has been given, but none stands in need of an- i
otherunless we require it to prevent a misunderstanding. One might |
say: an explanation serves to remove or to avert a misunder- |

standing-one, that is, that would occur but for the explanation; j

not every one that i can imagine.

It may easily look as if every doubt merely revealed an existing gap
in the foundations; so that secure understanding is only possible if we
first doubt everything that can be doubted, and then remove all these
doubts.

The sign-post is in orderif, under normal circumstances, it fulfils
its purpose.

88. If i tell someone stand roughly heremay not this explana
tion work perfectly? And cannot every other one fail too?

But isnt it an inexact explanation? Yes; why shouldnt we call it
inexact? Only let us understand what inexact means. For it does
not mean unusable. And let us consider what we call an exact
explanation in contrast with this one. Perhaps something like drawing
a chalk line round an area? Here it strikes us at once that the line has
breadth. So a colour-edge would be more exact. But has this exactness
still got a function here: isnt the engine idling? And remember too that
we have not yet defined what is to count as overstepping this exact
boundary; how, with what instruments, it is to be established. And
so on.

We understand what it means to set a pocket watch to the exact time
or to regulate it to be exact. But what if it were asked: is this exactness
ideal exactness, or how nearly does it approach the ideal? Of course,
we can speak of measurements of time in which there is a different,
and as we should say a greater, exactness than in the measurement of
time by a pocket-watch; in which the words to set the clock to the
exact time have a different, though related meaning, and to tell the
time is a different process and so on. Now, if i tell someone: you
should come to dinner more punctually; you know it begins at one
oclock exactlyis there really no question of exactness here? Because
it is possible to say: think of the determination of time in the
laboratory or the observatory; there you see what exactness means?

42 e

philosophical investigations i

inexact is really a reproach, and exact is praise. And that is to
say that what is inexact attains its goal less perfectly than what is more
exact. Thus the point here is what we call the goal. Am i inexact
when i do not give our distance from the sun to the nearest foot, or
tell a joiner the width of a table to the nearest thousandth of an inch?

No single ideal of exactness has been laid down; we do not know
what we should be supposed to imagine under this headunless you
yourself lay down what is to be so called. But you will find it difficult
to hit upon such a convention; at least any that satisfies you.

89. These considerations bring us up to the problem: in what sense
is logic something sublime?

J for there seemed to pertain to logic a peculiar deptha universal
 significance. Logic lay, it seemed, at the bottom of all the sciences.
For logical investigation explores the nature of all things. It seeks to
see to the bottom of things and is not meant to concern itself whether

what actually happens is this or that. -it takes its rise, not from

an interest in the facts of nature, nor from a need to grasp causal
connexions: but from an urge to understand the basis, or essence, , of
everything empirical. Not, however, as if to this end we had to hunt out
new facts; it is, rather, of the essence of our investigation that we do
not seek to learn anything new by it. We want to understand something
that is already in plain view. For this is what we seem in some sense
not to understand.

Augustine says in the confessions quid est ergo tempus? Si nemo
ex me quaerat scio; si quaerenti explicare velim, nescio. This could
not be said about a question of natural science (what is the specific
gravity of hydrogen? For instance). Something that we know when
no one asks us, but no longer know when we are supposed to give an
account of it, is something that we need to remind ourselves of. (and
it is obviously something of which for some reason it is difficult to
remind oneself. )

90. We feel as if we had to penetrate phenomena: our investigation,
however, is directed not towards phenomena, but, as one might say,
towards the possibilities* of phenomena. We remind ourselves, that
is to say, of the kind of statement that we make about phenomena.
Thus augustine recalls to mind the different statements that are made
about the duration, past present or future, of events. (these are, of
course, not philosophical statements about time, the past, the present
and the future. )

philosophical investigations i

43

our investigation is therefore a grammatical one. Such an investiga
tion sheds light on our problem by clearing misunderstandings away.
Misunderstandings concerning the use of words, caused, among other
things, by certain analogies between the forms of expression in different
regions of language. Some of them can be removed by substituting
one form of expression for another; this may be called an analysis
of our forms of expression, for the process is sometimes like one of
taking a thing apart.

91. But now it may come to look as if there were something like a
final analysis of our forms of language, and so a single completely
resolved form of every expression. That is, as if our usual forms of
expression were, essentially, unanalysed; as if there were something
hidden in them that had to be brought to light. When this is done
the expression is completely clarified and our problem solved.

It can also be put like this: we eliminate misunderstandings by
making our expressions more exact; but now it may look as if we were
moving towards a particular state, a state of complete exactness; and
as if this were the real goal of our investigation.

92. This finds expression in questions as to the essence of language,
of propositions, of thought. For if we too in these investigations are
trying to understand the essence of languageits function, its struc
ture, yet this is not what those questions have in view. For they
see in the essence, not something that already lies open to view and that
becomes surveyable by a rearrangement, but something that lies
beneath the surface. Something that lies within, which we see when we
look into the thing, and which an analysis digs out.

The essence is hidden from us 9 : this is the form our problem now
assumes. We ask: what is language? ,  what is a proposition?
And the answer to these questions is to be given once for all; and
independently of any future experience.

93. One person might say a proposition is the most ordinary
diing in the world and another: a propositionthats something

very queer 1 -and the latter is unable simply to look and see how

propositions really work. The forms that we use in expressing our
selves about propositions and thought stand in his way.

Why do we say a proposition is something remarkable? On the
one hand, because of the enormous importance attaching to it. (and
that is correct). On the other hand this, together with a misunder-

44 e

philosophical investigations i

standing of the logic of language, seduces us into thinking that some
thing extraordinary, something unique, must be achieved by proposi
tions. A misunderstanding makes it look to us as if a proposition did
something queer.

94. A proposition is a queer thing i  here we have in germ the
subliming of our whole account of logic. The tendency to assume a
pure intermediary between the propositional signs and the facts. Or
even to try to purify, to sublime, the signs themselves. For our forms
of expression prevent us in all sorts of ways from seeing that nothing
out of the ordinary is involved, by sending us in pursuit of chimeras.

95. Thought must be something unique. When we say, and
mean, that such-and-such is the case, weand our meaningdo not
stop anywhere short of the fact; but we mean: this  is  so. But this
paradox (which has the form of a truism) can also be expressed in this
way: thought can be of what is not the case.

96. Other illusions come from various quarters to attach themselves
to the special one spoken of here. Thought, language, now appear to
us as the unique correlate, picture, of the world. These concepts:
proposition, language, thought, world, stand in line one behind the
other, each equivalent to each. (but what are these words to be used
for now? The language-game in which they are to be applied is
missing. )

97. Thought is surrounded by a halo. Its essence, logic, presents
an order, in fact the a priori order of the world: that is, the order of
possibilities , which must be common to both world and thought.
But this order, it seems, must be utterly simple . It is prior to all
experience, must run through all experience; no empirical cloudiness

or uncertainty can be allowed to affect it-it must rather be of the

purest crystal. But this crystal does not appear as an abstraction;
but as something concrete, indeed, as the most concrete, as it were the
hardest thing there is (tractatus logico-philosopbicus no. 5.5563).

We are under the illusion that what is peculiar, profound, essential,
in our investigation, ^resides in its trying to grasp the incomparable
essence of language. That is, the order existing between the concepts
of proposition, word, proof, truth, experience, and so on. This order
is a super- order betweenso to speakj^r-concepts. Whereas, of
course* if the words language, experience, world, have a use, it
must be as humble a one as that of the words table, lamp, door.

Philosophical investigations i

45 '

98. On the one hand it is clear that every sentence in our language

is in order as it is. That is to say, we are not striving after an ideal,
as if our ordinary vague sentences had not yet got a quite unexception
able sense, and a perfect language awaited construction by us. On the
other hand it seems clear that where there is sense there must be perfect
order. -so there must be perfect order even in the vaguest sentence.

99. The sense of a sentenceone would like to saymay, of
course, leave this or that open, but the sentence must nevertheless
have a definite sense. An indefinite sensethat would really not be a
sense at all . This is like: an indefinite boundary is not really a
boundary at all. Here one thinks perhaps: if i say i have locked the
man up fast in the roomthere is only one door left openthen i
simply haven't locked him in at all; his being locked in is a sham.
One would be inclined to say here: you haven't done anything at all.
An enclosure with a hole in it is as good as none . But is that true?

100. But still, it isn't a game, if there is some vagueness in the
rules . But does this prevent its being a game? Perhaps you'll call
it a game, but at any rate it certainly isn't a perfect game. This means:
it has impurities, and what i am interested in at present is the pure
article. But i want to say: _we misunderstand the role of the ideal
in our language. That is to say: we too should call it a game, only we
are dazzled by the ideal and therefore fail to see the actual use of the
word game clearly.

101. We want to say that there can't be any vagueness in logic.
The idea now absorbs us, that the ideal 'must' be found in reality. Mean
while we do not as yet see how it occurs there, nor do we understand
the nature of this must. We think it must be in reality; for we think
we already see it there.

102. The strict and clear rules of the logical structure of proposi
tions appear to us as something in the background-hidden in the
medium of the understanding. I already see them (even though
through a medium): for i understand the propositional sign, i use it
to say something.

103. The ideal, as we think of it, is unshakable. You can never get
outside it; you must always turn back. There is no outside; outside
you cannot breathe. Where does this idea come from? It is like a pair
of glasses on our nose through which we see whatever we look at. It
never occurs to us to take them off.

Philosophical investigations

46c

104. We predicate of the thing what lies in the method of repre
senting it. Impressed by the possibility of a comparison, we think
we are perceiving a state of affairs of the highest generality.

10 j. When we believe that we must find that order, must find the
ideal, in our actual language, we become dissatisfied with what are
ordinarily called propositions, words, signs.

The proposition and the word that logic deals with are supposed
to be something pure and clear-cut. And we rack our brains over the
nature of the real sign. It is perhaps the idea of the sign? Or the idea at
the present moment?

106. Here it is difficult as it were to keep our heads up, to see
that we must stick to the subjects of our every-day thinking, and not
go astray and imagine that we have to describe extreme subtleties,
which in turn we are after all quite unable to describe with the
means at our disposal. We feel as if we had to repair a torn spiders
web with our fingers.

107. The more narrowly we examine actual language, the sharper
becomes the conflict between it and our requirement. (for the crystal
line purity of logic was, of course, not a result of investigation : it was a
requirement. ) the conflict becomes intolerable; the requirement is
now in danger of becoming empty. We have got on to slippery ice
where there is no friction and so in a certain sense the conditions are
ideal, but also, just because of that, we are unable to walk. We want to
walk: so we need friction. Back to the rough ground!

108. We see that what we call sentence and language has
not the formal unity that i imagined, but is the family of structures

more or less related to one another. -but what becomes of logic

now? Its rigour seems to be giving way here. But in that case doesnt
logic altogether disappear? For how can it lose its rigour? Of course
not by our bargaining any of its rigour out of it. The preconceived idea
of crystalline purity can only be removed by turning our whole
examination round. (one might say: the axis of reference of our
examination must be rotated, but about the fixed point ofour real need. )

the philosophy of logic speaks of sentences and words in exactly the
sense in which we speak of them in ordinary life when we say e. G.

Faraday in the chemical history of a candle : water is one individual
thingit never changes.

Philosophical investigations i

47

here is a chinese sentence, or no, that only looks like writing; it is
actually just an ornament and so on.

We are talking about the spatial and temp oral phenomenon of
language, not about some non-spatiaj non-temporal phantasm. [note
in margm: only it is possible to be interested in a phenomenon in a
variety of ways]. But we talk about it as we do about the pieces in
chess when we are stating the rules of the game, not describing their
physical properties.

The question what is a word really? Is analogous to what is a
piece in chess?

109. It was true to say that our considerations could not be scientific

ones. It was not of any possible interest to us to find out empirically
that, contrary to our preconceived ideas, it is possible to think such-
and-suchwhatever that may mean. (the conception of thought as a ^
gaseous medium. ) and we may not advance any kind of theory. There !
Must not be anything hypothetical in our considerations . We must do |
away with all explanation* and description alone must ta ke. Lts^place. -
and this description gets its light, that is to say its purpose, from
the philosophical problems. These are, of course, not empirical
problems; they are solved, rather, by looking into the workings of our
language, and that in such a way as to make us recognize those work
ings: in despite of an urge to misunderstand them. The problems, a re^
solved, not by giving new inforination, but by arranging what _we
kaye always known . Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment
of our intelligence by means of language. J

110. Language (or thought) is something uniquethis proves to
be a superstition (not 2. Mistake! ), itself produced by grammatical illusions.

And now the impressiveness retreats to these illusions, to the
problems.

Hi. The problems arising through a misinterpretation of our forms,
of language have the character of depth. They are deep disquietudes;
their roots are as deep in us as the forms of our language and their

significance is as great as the importance of our language. -let us

ask ourselves: why do we feel a grammatical joke to be deep? (and that
is what the depth of philosophy is. )

112. A simile that has been absorbed into the forms of our
language produces a false appearance, and this disquiets us. But this
isnt how it is iwe say. Yet this is how it has to bey 9

48 e philosophical investigations i

113. But this is how it is- i say to myself over and over

again. I feel as though, if only i could fix my gaze absolutely sharply
on this fact, get it in focus, i must grasp the essence of the matter.

114. ( tractatus logico-philosophicus , 4.5): the general form of

propositions is: this is how things are. -that is the kind of propo

sition that one repeats to oneself countless times. One thinks that one is
tracing the outline of the things nature over and over again, and one is
merely tracing round the frame through which we look at it.

115. A picture held us captive. And we could not get outside it, for
it lay in our language and language seemed to repeat it to us inexorably.

116. When philosophers use a wordknowledge, being,
object, i, proposition, nameand try to grasp the essence
of the thing, one must always ask oneself: is the word ever actually
used in this way in the language-game which is its original home?

What we do is to bring words back from their metaphysical to their
everyday use.

117. You say to me: you understand this expression, dont
you? Well theni am using it in the sense you are familiar with.
As if the sense were an atmosphere accompanying the word, which it
carried with it into every kind of application.

If, for example, someone says that the sentence this is here
(saying which he points to an object in front of him) makes sense to
him, then he should ask himself in what special circumstances this
sentence is actually used. There it does make sense.

118. Where does our investigation get its importance from, since
it seems only to destroy everything interesting, that is, all that is great
and important? (as it were all the buildings, leaving behind only bits
of stone and rubble. ) what we are destroying is nothing but houses of
cards and we are clearing up the ground of language on which they
stand.

119. The results of philosophy are the uncovering of one or
another piece of plain nonsense and of bumps that the understanding
has got by running its head up against the limits of language. These
bumps make us see the value of the discovery.

120. When i talk about language (words, sentences, etc. ) i must
speak the language of every day. Is this language somehow too coarse
and material for what we want to say? Then how is another one to he

philosophical investigations i

49 e

constructed and how strange that we should be able to do anything
at all with the one we have i

in giving explanations i already have to use language full-blown
(not some sort of preparatory, provisional one); this by itself shews
that i can adduce only exterior facts about language.

Yes, but then how can these explanations satisfy us? Well, your
very questions were framed in this language; they had to be expressed
in this language, if there was anything to ask!

And your scruples are misunderstandings.

Your questions refer to words; so i have to talk about words.

You say: the point isnt the word, but its meaning, and you think of
the meaning as a thing of the same kind as the word, though also
different from the word. Here the word, there the meaning. The
money, and the cow that you can buy with it. (but contrast: money,
and its use. )

121. One might think: if philosophy speaks of the use of the word
philosophy there must be a second-order philosophy. But it is not
so: it is, rather, like the case of orthography, which deals with the word
orthography among others without then being second-order.

122. A main source of our failure to understand is that we do not
command a clear view of the use of our words. Our grammar is lacking in
this sort of perspicuity. A perspicuous representation produces just
that understanding which consists in seeing connexions. Hence the
importance of finding and inventing intermediate cases .

The concept of a perspicuous representation is of fundamental
significance for us. It earmarks the form of account we give, the
way we look at things. (is this a weltanschauung? )

123. A philosophical problem has the form: i dont know my
way about.

124. Philosophy may in no way interfere with the actual use of
language; it can in the end only describe it.

For it cannot give it any foundation either.

It leaves everything as it is.

It also leaves mathematics as it is, and no mathematical discovery
can advance it. A leading problem of mathematical logic is for us
a problem of mathematics like any other.

Philosophical investigations i

5oe

125. It is the business of philosophy, not to resolve a contradiction
by means of a mathematical or logico-mathematical discovery, but
to make it possible for us to get a clear view of the state of mathematics
that troubles us: the state of affairs before the contradiction is resolved.
(and this does not mean that one is sidestepping a difficulty. )

the fundamental fact here is that we lay down rules, a technique,
for a game, and that then when we follow the rules, things do not
turn out as we had assumed. That we are therefore as it were entangled
in our own rules.

This entanglement in our rules is what we want to understand (i. E.
Get a clear view of).

It throws light on our concept of meaning something. For in those
cases things turn out otherwise than we had meant, foreseen. That is
just what we say when, for example, a contradiction appears: i didnt
mean it like that.

The civil status of a contradiction, or its status in civil life: there is
the philosophical problem.

126. Philosophy simply puts everything before us, and neither
explains nor deduces anything. Since everything lies open to view
there is nothing to explain. For what is hidden, for example, is of no
interest to us.

One might also give the name philosophy to what is possible
before all new discoveries and inventions.

127. The work of the philosopher consists in assembling reminders
for a particular purpose.

128. If one tried to advance theses in philosophy, it would never
be possible to debate them, because everyone would agree to them.

129. The aspects of things that are most important for us are
hidden because of their simplicity and familiarity. (one is unable to
notice somethingbecause it is always before ones eyes. ) the real
foundations of his enquiry do not strike a man at all. Unless that fact
has at some time struck him. And this means: we fail to be struck
by what, once seen, is most striking and most powerful.

130. Our clear and simple language-games are not preparatory studies
for a future regularization of languageas it were first approximations,
ignoring friction and air-resistance. The language-games are rather set
up as objects of comparison which are meant to throw light on the facts of
our language by way not only of similarities, but also of dissimilarities.

Philosophical investigations i

5 ie

131. For we can avoid ineptness or emptiness in our assertions
only by presenting the model as what it is, as an object of compari
sonas, so to speak, a measuring-rod; not as a preconceived idea to
which reality must correspond. (the dogmatism into which we fall so
easily in doing philosophy. )

132. We want to establish an order in our knowledge of the use
of language: an order with a particular end in view; one out of many
possible orders; not the order. To this end we shall constantly be
giving prominence to distinctions which our ordinary forms of
language easily make us overlook. This may make it look as if we
saw it as our task to reform language.

Such a reform for particular practical purposes, an improvement in
our terminology designed to prevent misunderstandings in practice,
is perfectly possible. But these are not the cases we have to do with.
The confusions which occupy us arise when language is like an engine
idling, not when it is doing work.

133. It is not our aim to refine or complete the system of rules for
the use of our words in unheard-of ways.

For the clarity that we are aiming at is indeed complete clarity. But
this simply means that the philosophical problems should completely
disappear.

The real discovery is the one that makes me capable of stopping
doing philosophy when i want to. The one that gives philosophy
peace, so that it is no longer tormented by questions which bring itself
in question. Instead, we now demonstrate a method, by examples;
and the series of examples can be broken off. Problems are solved
(difficulties eliminated), not a single problem.

There is not a philosophical method, though there are indeed
methods, like different therapies.

134. Let us examine the proposition: this is how things are.
How can i say that this is the general form of propositions? It is
first and foremost itself a proposition, an english sentence, for it has
a subject and a predicate. But how is this sentence appliedthat is,
in our everyday language? For i got it from there and nowhere else.

We may say, e. G. : he explained his position to me, said that this
was how things were, and that therefore he needed an advance.
So far, then, one can say that that sentence stands for any statement
it is employed as a propositional schema , but only because it has the

philosophical investigations i

5 2e

construction of an english sentence. It would be possible to say instead
such and such is the case, this is the situation, and so on. It would
also be possible here simply to use a letter, a variable, as in symbolic
logic. But no one is going to call the letter p the general form of
propositions. To repeat: this is how things are had that position
only because it is itself what one calls an english sentence. But though
it is a proposition, still it gets employed as a propositional variable.
To say that this proposition agrees (or does not agree) with reality
would be obvious nonsense. Thus it illustrates the fact that one feature
of our concept of a proposition is, sounding like a proposition .

135. But havent we got a concept of what a proposition is, of what
we take proposition to mean? Yes; just as we also have a concept
of what we mean by game. Asked what a proposition iswhether
it is another person or ourselves that we have to answerwe shall
give examples and these will include what one may call inductively
defined series of propositions. This is the kind of way in which we
have such a concept as proposition. (compare the concept of a
proposition with the concept of number. )

136. At bottom, giving this is how things are as the general
form of propositions is the same as giving the definition: a proposition
is whatever can be true or false. For instead of this is how things
are i could have said this is true. (or again this is false. )
but we have

 p is true = p
 p is false = not-p.

And to say that a proposition is whatever can be true or false
amounts to saying: we call something a proposition when in our
language we apply the calculus of truth functions to it.

Now it looks as if the definitiona proposition is whatever can be
true or falsedetermined what a proposition was, by saying: what fits
the concept true, or what the concept true fits, is a proposition.
So it is as if we had a concept of true and false, which we could use
to determine what is and what is not a proposition. What engages with
the concept of truth (as with a cogwheel), is a proposition.

But this is a bad picture. It is as if one were to say the king in
chess is the piece that one can check. But this can mean no more than
that in our game of chess we only check the king. Just as the proposi
tion that only a proposition can be true or false can say no more than

philosophical investigations i

53

that we only predicate true and false of what we call a proposi
tion. And what a proposition is is in one sense determined by the
rules of sentence formation (in english for example), and in another
sense by the use of the sign in the language-game. And the use of the
words true and false may be among the constituent parts of this
game; and if so it belongs to our concept proposition but does not
fit 9 it. As we might also say, check belongs to our concept of the king
in chess (as so to speak a constituent part of it). To say that check did
not fit our concept of the pawns, would mean that a game in which
pawns were checked, in which, say, the players who lost their pawns
lost, would be uninteresting or stupid or too complicated or something
of the kind.

137. What about learning to determine the subject of a sentence by
means of the question who or what. . . . ? Here, surely, there is
such a thing as the subjects fitting this question; for otherwise how
should we find out what the subject was by means of the question?
We find it out much as we find out which letter of the alphabet comes
after k by saying the alphabet up to k to ourselves. Now in what
sense does l fit on to this series of letters? In that sense true and
false could be said to fit propositions; and a child might be taught
to distinguish between propositions and other expressions by being
told ask yourself if you can say is true after it. If these words fit,
its a proposition. (and in the same way one might have said: ask
yourself if you can put the words this is how things are: in front
of it. )

138. But cant the meaning of a word that i understand fit the
sense of a sentence that i understand? Or the meaning of one word

fit the meaning of another? -of course, if the meaning is the use we

make of the word, it makes no sense to speak of such fitting. But
we understand the meaning of a word when we hear or say it; we grasp
it in a flash, and what we grasp in this way is surely something different
from the use which is extended in time 1

must i know whether i understand a word? Dont i also sometimes
imagine myself to understand a word (as i may imagine i understand
a kind of calculation) and then realize that i did not understand it?
(i thought i knew what relative and absolute motion meant, but
i see that i dont know. )

54

philosophical investigations i

139. When someone says the word cube to me, for example,
i know what it means. But can the whole use of the word come before
my mind, when i understand it in this way?

Well, but on the other hand isnt the meaning of the word also
determined by this use? And can these ways of determining meaning
conflict? Can what we grasp in a flash accord with a use, fit or fail to
fit it? And how can what is present to us in an instant, what comes
before our mind in an instant, fit a use ?

What really comes before our mind when we understand a word?
| isnt it so m ething like a picture? Cant it be. A picture?

Well, suppose that a picture does come before your mind when you
hear the word cube, say the drawing of a cube. In what sense can
this picture fit or fail to fit a use of the word cube? Perhaps you
say: its quite simple; if that picture occurs to me and i point to
a triangular prism for instance, and say it is a cube, then this use of the
word doesnt fit the picture. But doesnt it fit? I have purposely
so chosen the example that it is quite easy to imagine a method of
projection according to which the picture does fit after all.

The picture of the cube did indeed suggest a certain use to us, but
it was possible for me to use it differently.

(a) i believe the right word in this case is . . . .. Doesnt this
shew that the meaning of a word is a something that comes before our
mind, and which is, as it were, the exact picture we want to use here?
Suppose i were choosing between the words "imposing, dignified,
proud, venerable; isnt it as though i were choosing between
drawings in a portfolio? No: the fact that one speaks of the appropriate
word does not shew the existence of a something that etc.. One is
inclined, rather, to speak of this picture-like something just because
one can find a word appropriate; because one often chooses between
words as between similar but not identical pictures; because pictures
are often used instead of words, or to illustrate words; and so on.

(b) i see a picture; it represents an old man walking up a steep
path leaning on a stick. How? Might it not have looked just the samp
if he had been sliding downhill in that position? Perhaps a martian
would describe the picture so. I do not need to explain why we do not
describe it so.

/

philosophical investigations i

55

140. Then what sort of mistake did i make; was it what we should
like to express by saying: i should have thought the picture forced a
particular use on me? How could i think that? What did i think? Is
there such a thing as a picture, or something like a picture, that forces
a particular application on us; so that my mistake lay in confusing one
picture with another? For we might also be inclined to express
ourselves like this: weare at most under a psychological, not a logical,
compulsion. And now it looks quite as if we knew of two kinds of
case.

What was the effect of my argument? It called our attention to
(reminded us of) the fact that there are other processes, besides the one
we originally thought of, which we should sometimes be prepared to
call applying the picture of a cube. So our belief that the picture
forced a particular application upon us* consisted in the fact that only
the one case and no other occurred to us. There is another solution
as well means: there is something else that i am also prepared to call
a solution; to which i am prepared to apply such-and-such a picture,
such-and-such an analogy, and so on.

What is essential is to see that' the same thing can come before our
minds when we hear the word and the application still be different.
Has it the same meaning both times? I think we shall say not.

141. Suppose, however, that not merely the picture of the cube,

but also the method of projection comes before our mind? -how

am i to imagine this? Perhaps i see before me a schema shewing the
method of projection: say a picture of two cubes connected by lines
of projection. But does this really get me any further? Cant i now

imagine different applications of this schema too? -well, yes, but

then cant an application come before my mind ? It can: only we need to
get clearer about our application of this expression. Suppose i explain
various methods of projection to someone so that he may go on to
apply them; let us- ask ourselves when we should say that the method
that i intend comes before his mind.

Now clearly we accept two different kinds of criteria for this:
on the one hand the picture (of whatever kind) that at some time or
other comes before his mind; on the other, the application whichin
the course of timehe makes of what he imagines. (and cant it be
clearly seen here that it is absolutely inessential for the picture to exist
in his imagination rather than as a drawing or model in front of him;
or again as something that he himself constructs as a model? )

philosophical investigations i

56 

gin there be a collision between picture and application? There can,
inasmuch as the picture makes us expect a different use, because people
in general apply this picture like this.

I want to say: we have here a normal case, and abnormal cases.

142. It is only in normal cases that the use of a word is clearly
prescribed; we know, are in no doubt, what to say in this or that case.
The more abnormal the case, the more doubtful it becomes what
we are to say. And if things were quite different from what they

actually are-if there were for instance no characteristic expression

of pain, of fear, of joy; if rule became exception and exception rule;

or if both became phenomena of roughly equal frequency-this would

make our normal language-games lose their point. The procedure of
putting a lump of cheese on a balance and fixing the price by the
turn of the scale would lose its point if it frequently happened for
such lumps to suddenly grow or shrink for no obvious reason.
This remark will become clearer when we discuss such things as the
relation of expression to feeling, and similar topics.

143. Let us now examine the following kind of language-game:
when a gives an order b has to write down series of signs according
to a certain formation rule.

The first of these series is meant to be that of the natural numbers in
decimal notation. How does he get to understand this notation?
First of all series of numbers will be written down for him and he will
be required to copy them. (do not balk at the expression series of
numbers; it is not being used wrongly here. ) and here already there
is a normal and an abnormal learners reaction. At first perhaps we
guide his hand in writing out the series o to 9; but then the possibility
of getting him to understand will depend on his going on to write
it down independently. And here we can imagine, e. G. , that he
does copy the figures independently, but not in the right order:
he writes sometimes one sometimes another at random. And then
communication stops at that point. Or again, he makes  mistakes

what we have to mention in order to explain the significance,
i mean the importance, of a concept, are often extremely general facts
of nature: such facts as are hardly ever mentioned because of their
great generality.

Philosophical investigations i

57

in the order. The difference between this and the first case will of
course be one of frequency. Or he makes a systematic mistake; for
example, he copies every other number, or he copies the series o, i, 2,
3, 4, 5, .... Like this: 1, o, 3, 2, 5, 4, .... . Here we shall almost be
tempted to say that he has understood wrong.

Notice, however, that there is no sharp distinction between a random
mistake and a systematic one. That is, between what you are inclined
to call random and what systematic.

Perhaps it is possible to wean him from the systematic mistake (as
from a bad habit). Or perhaps one accepts his way of copying and
tries to teach him ours as an offshoot, a variant of his. And here too
our pupils capacity to learn may come to an end.

144. What do i mean when i say the pupils capacity to learn may
come to an end here? Do i say this from my own experience? Of
course not. (even if i have had such experience. ) then what am i
doing with that proposition? Well, i should like you to say: yes,
its true, you can imagine that too, that might happen too! But was
i trying to draw someones attention to the fact that he is capable of

imagining that? -1 wanted to put that picture before him, and his

acceptance of the picture consists in his now being inclined to regard a
given case differently: that is, to compare it with this rather than that
set of pictures. I have changed his way of looking at things . (indian
mathematicians: look at this. )

145. Suppose the pupil now writes the series o to 9 to our satisfac
tion. And this will only be the case when he is often successful, not if
he does it right once in a hundred attempts. Now i continue the series
and draw his attention to the recurrence of the first series in the units;
and then to its recurrence in the tens. (which only means that i use
particular emphases, underline figures, write them one under another
in such-and-such ways, and similar things. )and now at some
point he continues the series independentlyor he does not. But
why do you say that? So much is obvious! Of course; i only
wished to say: the effect of any further explanation depends on his
reaction .

Now, however, let us suppose that after some efforts on the teachers
part he continues the series correctly, that is, as we do it. So now we
can say he has mastered the system. But how far need he continue

philosophical investigations i

the series for us to have the right to say that? Clearly you cannot state
a limit here.

146. Suppose i now ask: has he understood the system when he
continues the series to the hundredth place? Orif i should not
speak of understanding in connection with our primitive language-
game: has he got the system, if he continues the series correctly so
for? Perhaps you will say here: to have got the system (or, again, to
understand it) cant consist in continuing the series up to this or that
number: that is only applying ones understanding. The understanding
itself is a state which is the source of the correct use.

What is one really thinking of here? Isnt one t hinkin g of the
derivation of a series from its algebraic formula? Or at least of some
thing analogous? But this is where we were before. The point is,
we can think of more than one application of an algebraic formula;
and every type of application can in turn be formulated algebraically;
but naturally this does not get us any further. The application is still
a criterion of understanding.

147. But how can it be? When i say i understand the rule of a
series, i am surely not saying so because i have found out that up to now
i have applied the algebraic formula in such-and-such a way i in my
own case at all events i surely know that i mean such-and-such a
series; it doesnt matter how far i have actually developed it.

Your idea, then, is that you know the application of the rule of the
series quite apart from remembering actual applications to particular
numbers. And you will perhaps say: of course 1 for the series is
infinite and the bit of it that i can have developed finite.

148. But what does this knowledge consist in? Let me ask: when
do you know that application? Always? Day and night? Or only
when you are actually thinking of the rule? Do you know it, that is,
in the same way as you know the alphabet and the multiplication table?
Or is what you call knowledge a state of consciousness or a process
say a thought of something, or the like?

149. If one says that knowing the abc is a state of the mind ,
one is thinking of a state of a mental apparatus (perhaps of the brain)
by means of which we explain the manifestations of that knowledge.
Such a state is called a disposition. But there are objections to speaking

philosophical investigations i

59 e

of a state of the mind here, inasmuch as there ought to be two different
criteria for such a state: a knowledge of the construction of the appara
tus, quite apart from what it does. (nothing would be more confusing
here than to use the words conscious and unconscious for the
contrast between states of consciousness and dispositions. For this
pair of terms covers up a grammatical difference. )

150. The grammar of the word knows is evidently closely
related to that of can, is able to. But also closely related to that
of understands. (mastery of a technique, )

151. But there is also this use of the word to know: we say
now i know iand similarly now i can do it! And now i
understand!

Let us imagine the following example: a writes series of numbers
down; b watches him and tries to find a law for the sequence of

numbers. If he succeeds he exclaims: now i can go on! -so this

capacity, this understanding, is something that makes its appearance in
a moment. So let us try and see what it is that makes its appearance
here. A has written down the numbers 1, 5, 11, 19, 29; at this point
b says he knows how to go on. What happened here? Various things
may have happened; for example, while a was slowly putting one
number after another, b was occupied with trying various algebraic
formulae on the numbers which had been written down. After a had
written the number 19 b tried the formula a^ = n 2 n  1; and the
next number confirmed his hypothesis.

(a) understanding a word: a state. But a mental state? Depres
sion, excitement, pain, are called mental states. Carry out a grammatical
investigation as follows: we say

he was depressed the whole day.

He was in great excitement the whole day.

He has been in continuous pain since yesterday.

We also say since yesterday i have understood this word. Con
tinuously, though? To be sure, one can speak of an interruption
of understanding. But in what cases? Compare: when did your pains
get less? And when did you stop understanding that word?

Q? ) suppose it were asked:  when do you know how to play chess?
All the time? Or just while you are making a move? And the whole of
chess during each move? How queer that knowing how to play
chess should take such a short time, and a game so much longer!

6oe philosophical investigations i

or again, b does not think of formulae. He watches a writing his
numbers down with a certain feeling of tension, and all sorts of vague
thoughts go through his head. Finally he asks himself: what is the
series of differences? He finds the series 4, 6, 8, 10 and says: now i
can go on.

Or he watches and says yes, i know that seriesand continues it,
just as he would have done if a had written down the series 1, 3,5, 7, 9.
Or he says nothing at all and simply continues the series. Perhaps
he had what may be called the sensation thats easy!. (such a sensa
tion is, for example, that of a light quick intake of breath, as when
one is slighdy startled. )

152. But are the processes which i have described here under
standing!

B understands the principle of the series surely doesnt mean

simply: the formula c \ =_ occurs to b. For it is perfectly

imaginable that the formula should occur to him and that he should
nevertheless not understand. He understands must have more in it
than: the formula occurs to him. And equally, more than any of those
more or less characteristic accompaniments or manifestations of under
standing.

153. We are trying to get hold of the mental process of under
standing which seems to be hidden behind those coarser and therefore
more readily visible accompaniments. But we do not succeed; or,
rather, it does not get as far as a real attempt. For even supposing i had
found something that happened in all those cases of understanding,
why should it be the understanding? And how can the process of
understanding have been hidden, when i said now i understand
because i understood? ! And if i say it is hiddenthen how do i know
what i have to look for? I am in a muddle.

154. But waitif now i understand the principle does not mean
the same as the formula .... Occurs to me (or i say the formula,
i write it down, etc. ) does it follow from this that i employ the

sentence now i understand. Or now i can go on as a

description of a process occurring behind or side by side with that of
saying the formula?

If there has to be anything behind the utterance of the formula it is
particular circumstances , which justify me in saying i can go onwhen
the formula occurs to me.

Philosophical investigations i

61 

try not to think of understanding as a mental process at all.

For that is the expression which confuses you. But ask yourself: in
what sort of case, in what kind of circumstances, do we say, now i
know how to go on, when, that is, the formula has occurred to me? S

in the sense in which there are processes (including mental processes) j
which are characteristic of understanding, understanding is not a j
mental process.

(a pains growing more and less; the hearing of a tune or a sentence:
these are mental processes. )

ij5. Thus what i wanted to say was: when he suddenly knew
how to go on, when he understood the principle, then possibly he
had a special experienceand if he is asked: what was it? What took \
place when you suddenly grasped the principle? Perhaps he will \ j

describe it much as we described it above-but for us it is the circum - \

stances under which he had such an exper ience that justify him in
saying in suc: h a case that h e understands, that he knows how to go on.

156. This will become clearer if we interpolate the consideration
of another word, namely reading. First i need to remark that i am
not counting the understanding of what is read as part of reading for
purposes of this investigation: reading is here the activity of rendering
out loud what is written or printed; and also of writing from dictation,
writing out something printed, playing from a score, and so on.

The use of this word in the ordinary circumstances of our life is of
course extremely familiar to us. But the part the word plays in our life,
and therewith the language-game in which we employ it, would be
difficult to describe even in rough outline. A person, let us say an
englishman, has received at school or at home one of the kinds of
education usual among us, and in the course of it has learned to read
his native language. Later he reads books, letters, newspapers, and
other things.

Now what takes place when, say, he reads a newspaper? -his

eye passesas we sayalong the printed words, he says them out
loudor only to himself; in particular he reads certain words by taking
in their printed shapes as wholes; others when his eye has taken in
the first syllables; others again he reads syllable by syllable, and an
occasional one perhaps letter by letter, we should also say that he
had read a sentence if he spoke neither aloud nor to himself during
the reading but was afterwards able to repeat the sentence word for
word or nearly so. He may attend to what he reads, or againas we

62 e

philosophical investigations i

might put itfunction as a mere reading-machine: i mean, read aloud
and correctly without attending to what he is reading; perhaps with his
attention on something quite different (so that he is unable to say what
he has been reading if he is asked about it immediately afterwards).

Now compare a beginner with this reader* the beginner reads the
words by laboriously spelling them out. Some however he guesses
from the context, or perhaps he already pardy knows the passage by
heart. Then his teacher says that he is not really reading the words
(and in certain cases that he is only pretending to read them).

If we think, of this sort of reading, the reading of a beginner, and
ask ourselves what reading consists in, we shall be inclined to say: it is a
special conscious activity of mind.

We also say of the pupil: of course he alone knows if he is really
reading or merely saying the words off by heart. (we have yet to
discuss these propositions: he alone knows_. )

but i want to say: we have to admit thatas far as concerns
uttering any one of the printed wordsthe same thing may take place
in the consciousness of the pupil who is "pretending to read, as in
that of the practised reader who is "reading it. The word ""to read
is applied differently when we are speaking of the beginner and of the

practised reader. -now we should of course like to say: what goes

on in that practised reader and in the beginner when they utter the
word catft be the same. And if there is no difference in what they
happen to be conscious of there must be one in the unconscious
workings of their minds, or, again, in the brain. So we should like
to say: there are at all events two different mechanisms at work here.
And what goes on in them must distinguish reading from not reading.
But these mechanisms are only hypotheses, models designed to
explain, to sum up, what you observe.

157. Consider the following case. Human beings or creatures of
some other kind are used by us as reading-machines. They are trained
for this purpose. The trainer says of some that they can already read,
of others that they cannot yet do so. Take the case of a pupil who has
so far not taken part in the training: if he is shewn a written word
he will sometimes produce some sort of sound, and here and there it
happens "accidentally to be roughly right. A third person hears this
pupil on such an occasion and says: ""he is reading. But the teacher
says: ""no, he isnt reading; that was just an accident. But let us
suppose that this pupil continues to react correctly to further words

philosophical investigations i

63 c

that are put before him. After a while the teacher says: now he can
read! But what of that first word? Is the teacher to say: i was
wrong, and he did read itor: he only began really to read later
on? When did he begin to read? Which was the first word that he
read ? This question makes no sense here. Unless, indeed, we give a
definition: the first word that a person reads is the first word of the
first series of 5 o words that he reads correctly (or something of the sort).

If on the other hand we use reading to stand for a certain
experience of transition from marks to spoken sounds, then it certainly
makes sense to speak of the first word that he really read. He can then
say, e. G. At this word for the first time i had the feeling: now i am
reading.

Or again, in the different case of a reading machine which trans
lated marks into sounds, perhaps as a pianola does, it would be possible
to say: the machine read only after such-and-such had happened to
itafter such-and-such parts had been connected by wires; the first
word that it read was . . .

But in the case of the living reading-machine reading meant
reacting to written signs in such-and-such ways. This concept was
therefore quite independent of that of a mental or other mechanism.
Nor can the teacher here say of the pupil: perhaps he was already
reading when he said that word. For there is no doubt about what
he did. The change when the pupil began to read was a change in
his behaviour, and it makes no sense here to speak of a first word in
his new state.

158. But isnt that only because of our too slight acquaintance
with what goes on in the brain and the nervous system? If we had
a more accurate knowledge of these things we should see what con
nexions were established by the training, and then we should be able
to say when we looked into his brain: now he has read this word,

now the reading connexion has been set up. -and it presumably

must be like thatfor otherwise how could we be so sure that there
was such a connexion? That it is so is presumably a priorior is it
only probable? And how probable is it? Now, ask yourself: what do

you know about these things? -but if it is a priori, that means that

it is a form of account which is very convincing to us.

159. But when we think the matter over we are tempted to say:
the one real criterion for anybodys reading is the conscious act of
reading, the act of reading the sounds off from the letters. A man

64 e philosophical investigations i

surely knows whether he is reading or only pretending to read!
Suppose a wants to make b believe he can read cyrillic script. He
learns a russian sentence by heart and says it while looking at the
printed words as if he were reading them. Here we shall certainly
say that a knows he is not reading, and has a sense of just this while
pretending to read. For there are of course many more or less charac
teristic sensations in reading a printed sentence; it is not difficult to
call such sensations to mind: think of sensations of hesitating, of look
ing closer, of misreading, of words following on one another more or
less smoothly, and so on. And equally there are characteristic sensa
tions in reciting something one has learnt by heart. In our example
a will have none of the sensations that are characteristic of reading,
and will perhaps have a set of sensations characteristic of cheating.

160. But imagine the following case: we give someone who can
read fluently a text that he never saw before. He reads it to usbut
with the sensation of saying something he has learnt by heart (this
might be the effect of some drug). Should we say in such a case that
he was not really reading the passage? Should we here allow his
sensations to count as the criterion for his reading or not reading?

Or again: suppose that a man who is under the influence of a
certain drug is presented with a series of characters (which need not
belong to any existing alphabet). He utters words corresponding to
the number of the characters, as if they were letters, and does so with
all the outward signs, and with the sensations, of reading. (we have
experiences like this in dreams; after waking up in such a case one says
perhaps: it seemed to me as if i were reading a script, though it was
not writing at all. ) in such a case some people would be inclined to
say the man was reading those marks. Others, that he was not.
Suppose he has in this way read (or interpreted) a set of five marks as
above and now we shew him the same marks in the reverse
order and he reads e vo ba; and in further tests he always retains
the same interpretation of the marks: here we should certainly be
inclined to say he was making up an alphabet for himself ad hoc and
then reading accordingly.

161. And remember too that there is a continuous series of tran
sitional cases between that in which a person repeats from memory
what he is supposed to be reading, and that in which he spells out every
word without being helped at all by guessing from the context or
knowing by heart.

Philosophical investigations i

65c

try this experiment: say the numbers from 1 to 12. Now look at
the dial of your watch and read them. What was it that you called
reading in the latter case? That is to say: what did you do, to make
it into reading

162. Let us try the following definition: you are reading when
you derive the reproduction from the original. And by the original i
mean the text which you read or copy; the dictation from which you
write; the score from which you play; etc. Etc.. Now suppose we have,
for example, taught someone the cyrillic alphabet, and told him how
to pronounce each letter. Next we put a passage before him and he
reads it, pronouncing every letter as we have taught him. In this case
we shall very likely say that he derives the sound of a word from
the written pattern by the rule that we have given him. And this
is also a clear case of reading ,. (we might say that we had taught him
the rule of the alphabet. )

but why do we say that he has derived the spoken from the printed
words? Do we know anything more than that we taught him how each
letter should be pronounced, and that he then read the words out
loud? Perhaps our reply will be: the pupil shews that he is using the
rule we have given him to pass from the printed to the spoken words.
How this can be shewn becomes clearer if we change our example to
one in which the pupil has to write out the text instead of reading it
to us, has to make the transition from print to handwriting. For in
this case we can give him the rule in the form of a table with printed
letters in one column and cursive letters in the other. And he shews
that he is deriving his script from the printed words by consulting the
table.

163. But suppose that when he did this he always wrote b for a>
c for b, d for c, and so on, and a for z? Surely we should call this too
a derivation by means of the table. He is using it now, we might say,
according to the second schema in 86 instead of the first.

It would still be a perfectly good case of derivation according to the
table, even if it were represented by a schema of arrows without
any simple regularity.

Suppose, however, that he does not stick to a single method of
transcribing, but alters his method according to a simple rule: if he
has once written n for a , then he writes 0 for the next a, p for the next,
and so on. But where is the dividing line between this procedure and
a random one?

66 e

philosophical investigations i

but does this mean that the word to derive really has no meaning,
since the meaning seems to disintegrate when we follow it up?

164. In case (162) the meaning of the word to derive stood out
clearly. But we told ourselves that this was only a quite special case
of deriving; deriving in a quite special garb, which had to be stripped
from it if we wanted to see the essence of deriving. So we stripped
those particular coverings off; but then deriving itself disappeared.
In order to find the real artichoke, we divested it of its leaves. For
certainly (162) was a special case of deriving; what is essential to
deriving, however, was not hidden beneath the surface of this case, but
his surface was one case out of the family of cases of deriving.

And in the same way we also use the word to read for a family
of cases. And in different circumstances we apply different criteria for
a persons reading.

165. But surelywe should like to sayreading is a quite particular
process 1 read a page of print and you can see that something special

is going on, something highly characteristic. -well, what does go on

when i read the page? I see printed words and i say words out loud.
But, of course, that is not all, for i might see printed words and say
words out loud and still not be reading. Even if the words which i say
are those which, going by an existing alphabet, are supposed to be read
off from the printed ones. And if you say that reading is a particular
experience, then it becomes quite unimportant whether or not you read
according to some generally recognized alphabetical rule. And what
does the characteristic thing about the experience of reading consist
in? Here i should like to say: the words that i utter come in a special
way. That is, they do not come as they would if i were for example
making them up. They come of themselves. But even that is not
enough; for the sounds of words may occur to me while i am looking at
printed words, but that does not mean that i have read them. In
addition i might say here, neither do the spoken words occur to me
as if, say, something reminded me of them. I should for example not
wish to say: the printed word nothing always reminds me of the
sound nothingbut the spoken words as it were slip in as one

the grammar of the expression a quite particular (atmosphere).
One says this face has a quite particular expression, and maybe
looks for words to characterize it.

Philosophical investigations i

6 ? E

reads. And if i so much as look at a german printed word, there
occurs a peculiar process, that of hearing the sound inwardly.

166. I said that when one reads the spoken words come in a
special way: but in what way? Isnt this a fiction? Let us look at
individual letters and attend to the way the sound of the letter comes.
Read the letter a. Now, how did the sound come? We have no

idea what to say about it. -now write a small roman a. How

did the movement of the hand come as you wrote? Differently from
the way the sound came in the previous experiment? All i know is,
i looked at the printed letter and wrote the cursive letter. -now look

at the mark and let a sound occur to you as you do so; utter it.

The sound u occurred to me; but i could not say that there was any
essential difference in the kind of way that sound came. The difference
lay in the difference of situation. I had told myself beforehand that i
was to let a sound occur to me; there was a certain tension present
before the sound came. And i did not say u automatically as i do
when i look at the letter u. Further, that mark was not familiar to
me in the way the letters of the alphabet are. I looked at it rather
intently and with a certain interest in its shape; as i looked i thought

of a reversed sigma. -imagine having to use this mark regularly, , as

a letter; so that you got used to uttering a particular sound at the sight
of it, say the sound sh. Can we say anything but that after a while
this sound comes automatically when we look at the mark? That is
to say: i no longer ask myself on seeing it what sort of letter is that?
Nor, of course, do i tell myself this mark makes me want to utter
the sound sh , nor yet this mark somehow reminds me of the
sound sh .

(compare with this the idea that memory images are distinguished
from other mental images by some special characteristic. )

167. Now what is there in the proposition that reading is a quite
particular process? It presumably means that when we read one
particular process takes place, which we recognize. But suppose
that i at one time read a sentence in print and at another write it in

morse codeis the mental process really the same? -on the other

hand, however, there is certainly some uniformity in the experience
of reading a page of print. For the process is a uniform one. And
it is quite easy to understand that there is a difference between this
process and one of, say, letting words occur to one at the sight of
arbitrary marks. For the mere look of a printed line is itself extremely

68

philosophical investigations i

characteristicit presents, that is, a quite special appearance, the letters
all roughly the same size, akin in shape too, and always recurring;
most of the words constantly repeated and enormously familiar to us,
like well-known faces. Think of the uneasiness we feel when the
spelling of a word is changed. (and of the still stronger feelings that
questions about the spelling of words have aroused. ) of course, not
all signs have impressed themselves on us so strongly . A sign in the
algebra of logic for instance can be replaced by any other one without
exciting a strong reaction in us.

Remember that the look of a word is familiar to us in the same kind
of way as its sound.

168. Again, our eye passes over printed lines differently from the
way it passes over arbitrary pothooks and flourishes. (i am not
speaking here of what can be established by observing the movement
of the eyes of a reader. ) the eye passes, one would like to say, with
particular ease, without being held up; and yet it doesnt skid. And at the
same time involuntary speech goes on in the imagination. That is how
it is when i read german and other languages, printed or written,
and in various styles. But what in all this is essential to reading as
such? Not any one feature that occurs in all cases of reading. (compare
reading ordinary print with reading words which are printed entirely
in capital letters, as solutions of puzzles sometimes are. How different
it islor reading our script from right to left. )

169. But when we read dont we feel the word-shapes somehow

causing our utterance? -read a sentence. And now look along the

following line

&8=^ ^? B +% 8l*

and say a sentence as you do so. Cant one feel that in the first case
the utterance was connected with seeing the signs and in the second
went on side by side with the seeing without any connexion?

But why do you say that we felt a causal connexion? Causation is
surely something established by experiments, by observing a regular
concomitance of events for example. So how could i say that i felt
something which is established by experiment? (it is indeed true
that observation of regular concomitances is not the only way we
establish causation. ) one might rather say, i feel that the letters are
the reason why i read such-and-such. For if someone asks me why

philosophical investigations i 6 9 e

do you read such-and-such? I justify my reading by the letters which
are there.

This justification, however, was something that i said, or thought:
what does it mean to say that i feel it? I should like to say: when i

read i feel a kind of influence of the letters working on me-but i

feel no influence from that series of arbitrary flourishes on what i
say. Let us once more compare an individual letter with such a
flourish. Should i also say i feel the influence of i when i read it?
It does of course make a difference whether i say i when i see i
or when i see . The difference is, for instance, that when i see the
letter it is automatic for me to hear the sound i inwardly, it happens
even against my will; and i pronounce the letter more effortlessly
when i read it than when i am looking at . That is to say: this is
how it is when i make the experiment ; but of course it is not so if i
happen to be looking at the mark  and at the same time pronounce
a word in which the sound i occurs.

170. It would never have occurred to us to think that we felt the
influence of the letters on us when reading, if we had not compared the
case of letters with that of arbitrary marks. And here we are indeed
noticing a difference. And we interpret it as the difference between being
influenced and not being influenced.

In particular, this interpretation appeals to us especially when we
make a point of reading slowlyperhaps in order to see what does
happen when we read. When we, so to speak, quite intentionally let
ourselves be guided by the letters. But this letting myself be guided in
turn only consists in my looking carefully at the lettersand perhaps
excluding certain other thoughts.

We imagine that a feeling enables us to perceive as it were a con
necting mechanism between the look of the word and the sound that
we utter. For when i speak of the experiences of being influenced,
of causal connexion, of being guided, that is really meant to imply that
i as it were feel the movement of the lever which connects seeing the
letters with speaking.

171. I might have used other words to hit off the experience i have
when i read a word. Thus i might say that the written word intimates
the sound to me. Or again, that when one reads, letter and sound
form a unity as it were an alloy. (in the same way e. G. The faces of
famous men and the sound of their names are fused together. This

7 o e philosophical investigations i

name strikes me as the only right one for this face. ) when i feel this
unity, i might say, i see or hear the sound in the written word.

But now just read a few sentences in print as you usually do when
you are not thinking about the concept of reading; and ask yourself
whether you had such experiences of unity, of being influenced and
the rest, as you read. Dont say you had them unconsciously! Nor
should we be misled by the picture which suggests that these phe
nomena came in sight on closer inspection. If i am supposed to
describe how an object looks from far off, i dont make the description
more accurate by saying what can be noticed about the object on
closer inspection.

172. Let us consider the experience of being guided, and ask
ourselves: what does this experience consist in when for instance our
course is guided? Imagine the following cases:

you are in a playing field with your eyes bandaged, and someone
leads you by the hand, sometimes left, sometimes right; you have
constantly to be ready for the tug of his hand, and must also take care
not to stumble when he gives an unexpected tug.

Or again: someone leads you by the hand where you are unwilling
to go, by force.

Or: you are guided by a partner in a dance; you make yourself as
receptive as possible, in order to guess his intention and obey the
slightest pressure.

Or: someone takes you for a walk; you are having a conversation;
you go wherever he does.

Or: you walk along a field-track, simply following it.

All these situations are similar to one another; but what is common
to all the experiences?

173. But being guided is surely a particular experience! The
answer to this is: you are now thinking of a particular experience of
being guided.

If i want to realize the experience of the person in one of the earlier
examples, whose writing is guided by the printed text and the table,
i imagine conscientious looking-up, and so on. As i do this i assume
a particular expression of face (say that of a conscientious book
keeper). Carefulness is a most essential part of this picture; in another
the exclusion of every volition of ones own would be essential. (but
take something normal people do quite unconcernedly and imagine
someone accompanying it with the expressionand why not the

philosophical investigations i

7 ie

feelings? Of great carefulness. Does that mean he is careful?
Imagine a servant dropping the tea-tray and everything on it with all
the outward signs of carefulness. ) if i imagine such a particular
experience, it seems to me to be the experience of being guided (or of
reading). But now i ask myself: what are you doing? You are
looking at every letter, you are making this face, you are writing the
letters with deliberation (and so on). So that is the experience of

being guided? -here i should like to say: no, it isnt that; it is

something more inward, more essential. It is as if at first all these
more or less inessential processes were shrouded in a particular
atmosphere, which dissipates when i look closely at them.

174. Ask yourself how you draw a line parallel to a given one with
deliberationand another time, with deliberation, one at an angle
to it. What is the experience of deliberation? Here a particular look,
a gesture, at once occur to youand then you would like to say:
and it just is a particular inner experience. (and that is, of course,
to add nothing).

(this is connected with the problem of the nature of intention, of
willing. )

175. Make some arbitrary doodle on a bit of paper. -and now

make a copy next to it, let yourself be guided by it. -1 should like

to say: sure enough, i was guided here. But as for what was charac
teristic in what happenedif i say what happened, i no longer find it
characteristic.

But now notice this: while i am being guided everything is quite
simple, i notice nothing special ; but afterwards, when i ask myself
what it was that happened, it seems to have been something indescrib
able. Afterwards no description satisfies me. Its as if i couldnt believe
that i merely looked, made such-and-such a face, and drew a line.
But dont i remember anything else? No; and yet i feel as if there must
have been something else; in particular when i say  guidance , ^in
fluence^^ and other such words to myself. For surely, i tell myself,
i was being guided only then does the idea of that ethereal,
intangible influence arise.

176. When i look back on the experience i have the feeling that
what is essential about it is an experience of being influenced, of a
connexionas opposed to any mere simultaneity of phenomena: but
at the same time i should not be willing to call any experienced phe
nomenon the experience of being influenced. (this contains the

philosophical investigations i

72 c

germ of the idea that the will is not a phenomenon. ) i should like to say
that i had experienced the because', and yet t do not want to call
any phenomenon the experience of the because.

177. I should like to say: i experience the because. Not because
i remember such an experience, but because when i reflect on what i
experience in such a case i look at it through the medium of the concept
because (or influence or cause or connexion). For of course it
is correct to say i drew the line under the influence of the original:
this, however, does not consist simply in my feelings as i drew the
lineunder certain circumstances, it may consist in my drawing it
parallel to the othereven though this in turn is not in general essential
to being guided.

178. We also say: you can see that i am guided by itand
what do you see, if you see this?

When i say to myself: but i am guidedi make perhaps a move
ment with my hand, which expresses guiding. Make such a move
ment of the hand as if you were guiding someone along, and then ask
yourself what the guiding character of this movement consisted in. For
you were not guiding anyone. But you still want to call the movement
one of guiding. This movement and feeling did not contain the
essence of guiding, but still this word forces itself upon you. It is just
a single form of guiding which forces the expression on us.

179. Let us return to our case (151). It is clear that we should not
say b had the right to say the words now i know how to go on,
just because he thought of the formulaunless experience shewed
that there was a connexion between thinking of the formulasaying it,
writing it downand actually continuing the series. And obviously
such a connexion does exist. And now one might think that the
sentence i can go on meant i have an experience which i know
empirically to lead to the continuation of the series. But does b mean
that when he says he can go on? Does that sentence come to his mind,
or is he ready to produce it in explanation of what he meant?

No. The words now i know how to go on were correctly used
when he thought of the formula: that is, given such circumstances as
that he had learnt algebra, had used such formulae before. But that
does not mean that his statement is only short for a description of all
the circumstances which constitute the scene for our language-game.
Think how we learn to use the expressions now i know how to go

philosophical investigations i 73 e

on, now i can go on and others; in what family of language-
games we learn their use.

We can also imagine the case where nothing at all occurred in bs
mind except that he suddenly said now i know how to go on
perhaps with a feeling of relief; and that he did in fact go on working
out the series without using the formula. And in this case too we
should sayin certain circumstancesthat he did know how to go on.

180. This is how these words are used . It would be quite misleading,
in this last case, for instance, to call the words a description of a
mental state. One might rather call them a signal; and we judge
whether it was rightly employed by what he goes on to do.

181. In order to understand this, we need also to consider the
following: suppose b says he knows how to go onbut when he
wants to go on he hesitates and cant do it: are we to say that he was
wrong when he said he could go on, or rather that he was able to go on
then, only now is not? Clearly we shall say different things in different
cases. (consider both kinds of case. )

182. The grammar of to fit, to be able, and to understand.
(exercises: (1) when is a cylinder c said to fit into a hollow cylinder h?
Only while c is stuck into h? (2) sometimes we say that c ceased to
fit into h at such-and-such a time. What criteria are used in such a
case for its having happened at that time? (3) what does one regard as
criteria for a bodys having changed its weight at a particular time if it
was not actually on the balance at that time? (4) yesterday i knew the
poem by heart; today i no longer know it. In what kind of case does it
make sense to ask: when did i stop knowing it? (5) someone asks
me can you lift this weight? I answer yes. Now he says do
it! And i cant. In what kind of circumstances would it count as a
justification to say when i answered yes i could do it, only now i
cant?

The criteria which we accept for fitting, being able to, under
standing, are much more complicated than might appear at first
sight. That is, the game with these words, their employment in the
linguistic intercourse that is carried on by their means, is more
involvedthe role of these words in our language otherthan we are
tempted to think.

(this role is what we need to understand in order to resolve
philosophical paradoxes. And hence definitions usually fail to

74 e philosophical investigations i

resolve them; and so, a fortiori does the assertion that a word is
indefinable. )

183. But did now i can go on in case (151) mean the same as
now the formula has occurred to me or something different?
We may say that, in those circumstances, the two sentences have the
same sense, achieve the same thing. But also that in general these two
sentences do not have the same sense. We do say: now i can go on,
i mean i know the formula, as we say i can walk, i mean i have
time; but also i can walk, i mean i am already strong enough;
or: i can walk, as far as the state of my legs is concerned, that is,
when we are contrasting this condition for walking with others. But
here we must be on our guard against thinking that there is some
totality of conditions corresponding to the nature of each case (e. G.
For a persons walking) so that, as it were, he could not but walk if
they were all fulfilled.

184. I want to remember a tune and it escapes me; suddenly i say
now i know it and i sing it. What was it like to suddenly know it?
Surely it cant have occurred to me in its entirety in that moment i
perhaps you will say: its a particular feeling, as if it were there 

but is it there? Suppose i now begin to sing it and get stuck? -

but may i not have been certain at that moment that 1 knew it? So in

some sense or other it was there after all! -but in what sense?

You would say that the tune was there, if, say, someone sang it through,
or heard it mentally from beginning to end. I am not, of course, denying
that the statement that the tune is there can also be given a quite dif
ferent m eaning for example, that i have a bit of paper on which it is
written. And what does his being certain, his knowing it, consist in?
Of course we can say: if someone says with conviction that now he
knows the time, then it is (somehow) present to his mind in its entirety

at that moment-and this is a definition of the expression the tune is

present to his mind in its entirety.

** 185. Let us return to our example (143). Nowjudged by the
usual criteriathe pupil has mastered the series of natural numbers.
Next we teach him to write down other series of cardinal numbers and
get him to the point of writing down series of the form

o, n, 2n, 3n, etc.

At an order of the form +n; so at the order +i he writes

philosophical investigations i 75 e

down the series of natural numbers. Let us suppose we have done
exercises and given him tests up to 1000.

Now we get the pupil to continue a series (say +2) beyond 1000
and he writes 1000, 1004, 1008, 1012.

We say to him: look what youve done! He doesnt understand.
We say: you were meant to add two: look how you began the series!
He answers: yes, isnt it right? I thought that was how i was

meant to do it. -or suppose he pointed to the series and said:

but i went on in the same way. It would now be no use to say:
but cant you see .... ? And repeat the old examples and explana
tions. In such a case we might say, perhaps: it comes natural to this
person to understand our order with our explanations as we should
understand the order: add 2 up to 1000, 4 up to 2000, 6 up to 3000
and so on.

Such a case would present similarities with one in which a person
naturally reacted to the gesture of pointing with the hand by looking
in the direction of the line from finger-tip to wrist, not from wrist to
finger-tip.

186. What you are saying, then, comes to this: a new insight
intuitionis needed at every step to carry out the order -fn cor
rectly. To carry it out correctly! How is it decided what is the right
step to take at any particular stage? The right step is the one that
accords with the orderas it was meant so when you gave the
order +2 you meant that he was to write 1002 after 1000and did
you also mean that he should write 1868 after 1866, and 100036
after 100034, and so onan infinite number of such propositions?
No: what i meant was, that he should write the next but one number
after every number that he wrote; and from this all those propositions
follow in turn. But that is just what is in question: what, at any stage,
does follow from that sentence. Or, again, what, at any stage we are to
call being in accord with that sentence (and with the mean- ing you
then put into the sentencewhatever that may have consisted in). It
would almost be more correct to say, not that an intuition was needed
at every stage, but that a new decision was needed at every stage.

187. But i already knew, at the time when i gave the order, that
he ought to write 1002 after 1000. Certainly; and you can also say
you meant it then; only you should not let yourself be misled by the
grammar of the words know and mean. For you dont want

76* philosophical investigations i

to say that you thought of the step from 1000 to 1002 at that time
and even if you did think of this step, still you did not think of other

ones. When you said i already knew at the time. That meant

something like: if i had then been asked what number should be
written after 1000, i should have replied 1002. And that i dont
doubt. This assumption is rather of the same kind as: if he had fallen
into the water then, i should have jumped in after him. Now, what
was wrong with your idea?

188. Here i should first of all like to say: your idea was that that
act of meaning the order had in its own way already traversed all
those steps: that when you meant it your mind as it were flew ahead
and took all the steps before you physically arrived at this or that
one.

Thus you were inclined to use such expressions as: the steps are
really already taken, even before i take them in writing or orally or in
thought. And it seemed as if they were in some unique way pre
determined, anticipatedas only the act of meaning can anticipate
reality.

189. But are the steps then not determined by the algebraic
formula? The question contains a mistake.

We use the expression: the steps are determined by the formula..

How is it used? We may perhaps refer to the fact that people are
brought by their education (training) so to use the formula y = x a ,
that they all work out the same? Value for y when they substitute the
same number for x. Or we may say: these people are so trained that
they all take the same step at the same point when they receive the
order add 3 . We might express this by saying: for these people the
order add 3 completely determines every step from one number
to the next. (in contrast with other people who do not know what
they are to do on receiving this order, or who react to it with perfect
certainty, but each one in a different way. )

on the other hand we can contrast different kinds of formula,
and the different kinds of use (different kinds of training) appropriate
to them. Then we call formulae of a particular kind (with the appro
priate methods of use) formulae which determine a number y for a
given value of x, and formulae of another kind, ones which do not
determine the number y for a given value of x. (j = x 2 would be
of the first kind, y =/-x 2 of the second. ) the proposition the
formula .... Determines a number y will then be a statement about

philosophical investigations i

77

the form of the formulaand now we must distinguish such a propo
sition as the formula which i have written down determines j,
or here is a formula which determines j, from one of the following
kind: the formula j = x 2 determines the number j for a given
value of x. The question is the formula written down there one
that determines j? Will then mean the same as is what is there a
formula of this kind or that? But it is not clear off-hand what we
are to make of the question is j = x 2 a formula which determines j
for a given value of x? One might address this question to a pupil
in order to test whether he understands the use of the word to deter
mine; or it might be a mathematical problem to prove in a particular
system that x has only one square.

190. It may now be said: the way the formula is meant determines
which steps are to be taken. What is the criterion for the way the
formula is meant? It is, for example, the kind of way we always use it,
the way we are taught to use it.

We say, for instance, to someone who uses a sign unknown to us:
if by w you mean x 2 , then you get this value for j 9 if you mean
2x, that one. Now ask yourself: how does one mean the one thing or
the other by xu?

That will be how meaning it can determine the steps in advance.

191. It is as if we could grasp , the whole use of the word in a
flash. Like what e. G. ? Cant the usein a certain sensebe grasped
in a flash? And in what sense can it not? The point is, that it is as if
we could grasp it in a flash in yet another and much more direct sense
than that. But have you a model for this? No. It is just that this
expression suggests itself to us. As the result of the crossing of
different pictures.

192. You have no model of this superlative fact, but you are
seduced into using a super-expression. (it might be called a philo
sophical superlative. )

193. The machine as symbolizing its action: the action of a
machinei might say at firstseems to be there in it from the start.
What does that mean? If we know the machine, everything else, that
is its movement, seems to be already completely determined.

We talk as if these parts could only move in this way, as if they
could not do anything else. How is thisdo we forget the possibility
of their bending, breaking off, melting, and so on? Yes; in many cases

philosophical investigations i

78 e

we dont think of that at all. We use a machine, or the drawing of a
machine, to symbolize a particular action of the machine. For instance,
we give someone such a drawing and assume that he will derive the
movement of the parts from it. (just as we can give someone a number
by telling him that it is the twenty-fifth in the series i, 4, 9, 16, ... . )

the machines action seems to be in it from the start means:
we are inclined to compare the future movements of the machine
in their definiteness to objects which are already lying in a drawer

and which we then take out. -but we do not say this kind of thing

when we are concerned with predicting the actual behaviour of a
machine. Then we do not in general forget the possibility of a distor
tion of the parts and so on. -we do talk like that, however, when

we are wondering at the way we can use a machine to symbolize a
given way of movingsince it can also move in quite different ways.

We might say that a machine, or the picture of it, is the first of a
series of pictures which we have learnt to derive from this one.

But when we reflect that the machine could also have moved dif
ferently it may look as if the way it moves must be contained in the
machine-as-symbol far more determinately than in the actual machine.
As if it were not enough for the movements in question to be empiric
ally determined in advance, but they had to be reallyin a mysterious
sensealready present . And it is quite true: the movement of the
machine-as-symbol is predetermined in a different sense from that in
which the movement of any given actual machine is predetermined.

194. When does one have the thought: the possible movements of
a machine are already there in it in some mysterious way? Well,
when one is doing philosophy. And what leads us into thinking that?
The kind of way in which we talk about machines. We say, for example,
that a machine has (possesses) such-and-such possibilities of move
ment; we speak of the ideally rigid machine which can only move in

such-and-such a way. -what is this possibility of movement? It is

not the movement , but it does not seem to be the mere physical conditions
for moving eitheras, that there is play between socket and pin,
the pin not fitting too tight in the socket. For while this is the empirical
condition for movement, one could also imagine it to be otherwise.
The possibility of a movement is, rather, supposed to be like a shadow
of the movement itself. But do you know of such a shadow? And
by a shadow i do not mean some picture of the movementfor such a

philosophical investigations i 79 e

picture would not have to be a picture of just this movement. But the
possibility of this movement must be the possibility of just this
movement. (see how high the seas of language run herel)

the waves subside as soon as we ask ourselves: how do we use
the phrase possibility of movement when we are talking about a

given machine? -but then where did our queer ideas come from?

Well, i shew you the possibility of a movement, say by means of a
picture of the movement: so possibility is something which is like
reality. We say: it isnt moving yet, but it already has the possibility

of moving-so possibility is something very near reality. Though

we may doubt whether such-and-such physical conditions make this
movement possible, we never discuss whether this is the possibility
of this or of that movement: so the possibility of the movement
stands in a unique relation to the movement itself; closer than that of a
picture to its subject; for it can be doubted whether a picture is the
picture of this thing or that. We say experience will shew whether
this gives the pin this possibility of movement, but we do not say
experience will shew whether this is the possibility of this move
ment: 50 it is not an empirical fact that this possibility is the possibility
of precisely this movement.

We mind about the kind of expressions we use concerning these
things; we do not understand them, however, but misinterpret them.
When we do philosophy we are like savages, primitive people, who
hear the expressions of civilized men, put a false interpretation on
them, and then draw the queerest conclusions from it.

195. But i dont mean that what i do now (in grasping a sense)
determines the future use causally and as a matter of experience, but
that in a queer way, the use itself is in some sense present. But of
course it is, in some sense! Really the only thing wrong with what you
say is the expression in a queer way. The rest is all right; and the
sentence only seems queer when one imagines a different language-game
for it from the one in which we actually use it. (someone once told
me that as a child he had been surprised that a tailor could sew a
dresshe thought this meant that a dress was produced by sewing
alone, by sewing one thread on to another. )

196. In our failure to understand the use of a word we take it as
the expression of a queer process. (as we think of time as a queer
medium, of the mind as a queer kind of being. )

philosophical investigations i

8oe

197. Its as if we could grasp the whole use of a word in a flash.
And that is just what we say we do. That is to say: we sometimes
describe what we do in these words. But there is nothing astonishing,
nothing queer, about what happens. It becomes queer when we are
led to think that the future development must in some way already be
present in the act of grasping the use and yet isnt present. For we say
that there isnt any doubt that we understand the word, and on the
other hand its meaning lies in its use. There is no doubt that i now.
Want to play chess, but chess is the game it is in virtue of all its rules
(and so on). Dont i know, then, which game i want to play until i
have played it? Or are all the rules contained in my act of intending?
Is it experience that tells me that this sort of game is the usual conse
quence of such an act of intending? So is it impossible for me to be
certain what i am intending to do? And if that is nonsensewhat
kind of super-strong connexion exists between the act of intending

and the thing intended? -where is the connexion effected between

the sense of the expression lets play a game of chess and all the
rules of the game? Well, in the list of rules of the game, in the teaching
of it, in the day-to-day practice of playing.

198. But how can a rule shew me what i have to do at this point?
Whatever i do is, on some interpretation, in accord with the rule.
That is not what we ought to say, but rather: any interpretation still
hangs in the air along with what it interprets, and cannot give it
any support. Interpretations by themselves do not determine mean
ing.

Then can whatever i do be brought into accord with the rule?
Let me ask this: what has the expression of a rulesay a sign-post
got to do with my actions? What sort of connexion is there here?
Well, perhaps this one: i have been trained to react to this sign in a
particular way, and now i do so react to it.

But that is only to give a causal connexion; to tell how it has come
about that we now go by the sign-post; not what this going-by-the-
sign really consists in. On the contrary; i have further indicated that
a person goes by a sign-post only in so far as there exists a regular use
of sign-posts, a custom.

199. Is what we call obeying a rule something that it would be
possible for only one man to do, and to do only once in his life?
This is of course a note on the grammar of the expression to obey a
rule.

Philosophical investigations i

81

it is not possible that there should have been only one occasion on
which someone obeyed a rule. It is not possible that there should have
been only one occasion on which a report was made, an order given or
understood; and so on. To obey a rule, to make a report, to give an
order, to play a game of chess, are custom (uses, institutions).

To understand a sentence means to understand a language. To v
understand a language means to be master of a technique. J

200. It is, of course, imaginable that two people belonging to a
tribe unacquainted with games should sit at a chess-board and go
through the moves of a game of chess; and even with all the appropriate
mental accompaniments. And if we were to see it we should say they
were playing chess. But now imagine a game of chess translated
according to certain rules into a series of actions which we do not
ordinarily associate with a game say into yells and stamping of feet.
And now suppose those two people to yell and stamp instead of play
ing the form of chess that we are used to; and this in such a way
that their procedure is translatable by suitable rules into a game of
chess. Should we still be inclined to say they were playing a game?
What right would one have to say so? Y ^

201. This was our paradox: no course'of action could be deter
mined by a rule, because every course of action can be made out to
accord with the rule. The answer was: if everything can be made out
to accord with the rule, then it can also be made out to conflict with it.
And so there would be neither accord nor conflict here.

It can be seen that there is a misunderstanding here from the mere fact
that in the course of our argument we give one interpretation after
another; as if each one contented us at least for a moment, until we
thought of yet another standing behind it. What this shews is that
there is a way of grasping a rule which is not an interpretation, but which
is exhibited in what we call obeying the rule and going against it
in actual cases.

Hence there is an inclination to say: every action according to the
rule is an interpretation. But we ought to restrict the term interpreta
tion to the substitution of one expression of the rule for another.

202. And hence also obeying a rule* is a practice. And to think one
is obeying a rule is not to obey a rule. Hence it is not possible to obey
a rule privately: otherwise thinking one was obeying a rule would be
the same thing as obeying it.

82 

philosophical investigations i

205. Language is a labyrinth of paths. You approach from one
side and know your way about; you approach the same place from
another side and no longer know your way about.

204. As things are i can, for example, invent a game that is never
played by anyone. But would the following be possible too: mankind
has never played any games; once, however, someone invented a game
which no one ever played? .

205. But it is just the queer thing about intention , about the
mental process, that the existence of a custom, of a technique, is not
necessary to it. That, for example, it is imaginable that two people
should play chess in a world in which otherwise no games existed; and
even that they should begin a game of chessand then be interrupted.

But isnt chess defined by its rules? And how are these rules present
in the mind of the person who is intending to play chess?

206. Following a rule is analogous to obeying an order. We are
trained to do so; we react to an order in a particular way. But what if
one person reacts in one way and another in another to the order and
the training? Which one is right?

Suppose you came as an explorer into an unknown country with a
language quite strange to you. In what circumstances would you
say that the people there gave orders, understood them, obeyed them,
rebelled against them, and so on?

The common behaviour of mankind is the system of reference by
means of which we interpret an unknown language.

207. Let us imagine that the people in that country carried on the
usual human activities and in the course of them employed, apparently,
an articulate language. If we watch their behaviour we find it intelli
gible, it seems logical. But when we try to learn their language we
find it impossible to do so. For there is no regular connexion between
what they say, the sounds they make, and their actions; but still these
sounds are not superfluous, for if we gag one of the people, it has the
same consequences as with us; without the sounds their actions fall
into confusionas i feel like putting it.

Are we to say that these people have a language: orders, reports,
and the rest?

There is not enough regularity for us to call it language.

208. Then am i defining order and rule by means of
regularity? How do i explain the meaning of regular, uniform.

Philosophical investigations i

8 3 e

same to anyone? I shall explain these words to someone who, say,
only speaks french by means of the corresponding french words.
But if a person has not yet got the concepts , i shall teach him to use the
words by means of examples and by practice . And when i do this i
do not communicate less to him than i know myself.

In the course of this teaching i shall shew him the same colours,
the same lengths, the same shapes, i shall make him find them and
produce them, and so on. I shall, for instance, get him to continue an
ornamental pattern uniformly when told to do so. And also to

continue progressions. And so, for example, when given:. To

go on:.

I do it, he does it after me; and i influence him by expressions of
agreement, rejection, expectation, encouragement. I let him go his
way, or hold him back; and so on.

Imagine witnessing such teaching. None of the words would be
explained by means of itself; there would be no logical circle.

The expressions and so on, and so on ad infinitum are also
explained in this teaching. A gesture, among other things, might serve
this purpose. The gesture that means go on like this, or and so
on has a function comparable to that of pointing to an object or a
place.

We should distinguish between the and so on which is, and the
and so on which is not, an abbreviated notation. And so on ad inf.
Is not such an abbreviation. The fact that we cannot write down all the
digits of n is not a human shortcoming, as mathematicians sometimes
think.

Teaching which is not meant to apply to anything but the examples
given is different from that which points beyond  them.

209. But then doesnt our understanding reach beyond all the
examples? A very queer expression, and a quite natural one!

But is that all? Isnt there a deeper explanation; or mustnt at least
the understanding of the explanation be deeper? Well, have i myself
a deeper understanding? Have i got more than i give in the explana
tion? But then, whence the feeling that i have got more?

Is it like the case where i interpret what is not limited as a length
that reaches beyond every length?

210. But do you really explain to the other person what you
yourself understand? Dont you get him to guess the essential thing?
You give him examples, but he has to guess their drift, to guess your

philosophical investigations i

84

intention. Every explanation which i can give myself i give to him
too. He guesses what i intend would mean: various interpreta
tions of my explanation come to his mind, and he lights on one of
them. So in this case he could ask; and i could and should answer him.

211. How can he know how he is to continue a pattern by himself

whatever instruction you give him? Well, how do i know? -if

that means have i reasons? The answer is: my reasons will soon
give out. And then i shall act, without reasons.

212. When someone whom i am afraid of orders me to continue
the series, i act quickly, with perfect certainty, and the lack of reasons
does not trouble me.

213. But this initial segment of a series obviously admitted of
various interpretations (e. G. By means of algebraic expressions) and
so you must first have chosen one such interpretation. Not at all.
A doubt was possible in certain circumstances. But that is not to say
that i did doubt, or even could doubt. (there is something to be said,
which is connected with this, about the psychological atmosphere of a
process. )

so it must have been intuition that removed this doubt? If intuition
is an inner voicehow do 1 know how i am to obey it? And how do i
know that it doesnt mislead me? For if it can guide me right, it can
also guide me wrong.

((intuition an unnecessary shuffle. ))

214. If you have to have an intuition in order to develop the series
1 234... You must also have one in order to develop the series
2222... .

215. But isnt the same at least the same?

We seem to have an infallible paradigm of identity in the identity
of a thing with itself. I feel like saying: here at any rate there cant
be a variety of interpretations. If you are seeing a thing you are
seeing identity too.

Then are two things the same when they are what one thing is?
And how am i to apply what the one thing shews me to the case of
two things?

216. A thing is identical with itself. There is no finer example
of a useless proposition, which yet is connected with a certain play
of the imagination. It is as if in imagination we put a thing into its
own shape and saw that it fitted.

Philosophical investigations i

856

we might also say: every thing fits into itself. Or again: every
thing fits into its own shape. At the same time we look at a thing
and imagine that there was a blank left for it, and that now it fits into
it exactly.

Does this spot fif into its white surrounding? But that is just
how it would look if there had at first been a hole in its place and it then
fitted into the hole. But when we say it fits we are not simply
describing this appearance; not simply this situation .

Every coloured patch fits exactly into its surrounding is a rather
specialized form of the law of identity.

217. How am i able to obey a rule? If this is not a question
about causes, then it is about the justification for my following the
rule in the way i do.

If i have exhausted the justifications i have reached bedrock, and
my spade is turned. Then i am inclined to say: this is simply what i
do.

(remember that we sometimes demand definitions for the sake not
of their content, but of their form. Our requirement is an archi
tectural one; the definition a kind of ornamental coping that supports
nothing. )

218. Whence comes the idea that the beginning of a series is a
visible section of rails invisibly laid to infinity? Well, we might imagine
rails instead of a rule. And infinitely long rails correspond to the un
limited application of a rule.

219. All the steps are really already taken means: i no longer
have any choice. The rule, once stamped with a particular meaning,
traces the lines along which it is to be followed through the whole

of space. -but if something of this sort really were the case, how

would it help?

No; my description only made sense if* it was to be understood
symbolically. I should have said: this is how it strikes me .

When i obey a rule, i do not choose.

I obey the rule blindly.

220. But what is the purpose of that symbolical proposition? It
was supposed to bring into prominence a difference between being
causally determined and being logically determined.

221. My symbolical expression was really a mythological descrip
tion of the use of a rule.

86 e

philosophical investigations i

222. The line intimates to me the way i am to go. But that is
of course only a picture. And if i judged that it intimated this or that as
it were irresponsibly, i should not say that i was obeying it like a rule.

223. One does not feel that one has always got to wait upon the
nod (the whisper) of the rule. On the contrary, we are not on tenter
hooks about what it will tell us next, but it always tells us the same,
and we do what it tells us.

One might say to the person one was training: look, i always do
the same thing: i.

224. The word agreement and the word rule are related to
one another, they are cousins. If i teach anyone the use of the one
word, he learns the use of the other with it.

225. The use of the word rule and the use of the word same are.
Interwoven. (as are the use of proposition and the use of true. )

226. Suppose someone gets the series of numbers 1, 3,5, 7,.... By
working out the series ix + i 1 . And now he asks himself: but am, i
always doing the same thing, or something different every time?

If from one day to the next you promise: to-morrow i will come
and see youare you saying the same thing every day, or every day
something different?

227. Would it make sense to say if he did something different every
day we should not say he was obeying a rule? That makes no sense.

228. We see a series in just one way! All right, but what is
that way? Clearly we see it algebraically, and as a segment of an
expansion. Or is there more in it than that? But the way we see it
surely gives us everything! But that is not an observation about the
segment of the series; or about anything that we notice in it; it gives
expression to the fact that we look to the rule for instruction and do
something, without appealing to anything else for guidance.

229. I believe that i perceive something drawn very fine in a
segment of a series, a characteristic design, which only needs the
addition of and so on, in order to reach to infinity.

230. The line intimates to me which way i am to go is only a
paraphrase of: it is my last arbiter for the way i am to go.

231. But surely you can see .... ? That is just the characteristic
expression of someone who is under the compulsion of a rule.

1 the mss. Have: .... Der reihe x = 1, 3, 5, 7, . . . . Indem er die reihe der x a + 1
hinschreibt. Ed.

Philosophical investigations i

87 e

232. Let us imagine a rule intimating to me which way i am to
obey it; that is, as my eye travels along the line, a voice within me says:
this waylwhat is the difference between this process of obeying
a kind of inspiration and that of obeying a rule? For they are surely
not the same. In the case of inspiration i await direction. I shall not j
be able to teach anyone else my technique of following the line. !
Unless, indeed, i teach him some way of hearkening, some kind of
receptivity. But then, of course, i cannot require him to follow the line
in the same way as i do.

These are not my experiences of acting from inspiration and accord
ing to a rule; they are grammatical notes.

253. It would also be possible to imagine such a training in a sort
of arithmetic. Children could calculate, each in his own wayas long
as they listened to their inner voice and obeyed it. Calculating in this
way would be like a sort of composing.

234. Would it not be possible for us, however, to calculate as we
actually do (all agreeing, and so on), and still at every step to have a
feeling of being guided by the rules as by a spell, feeling astonishment
at the fact that we agreed? (we might give thanks to the deity for our j
agreement. )

235. This merely shews what goes to make up what we call
obeying a rule in everyday life.

236. Calculating prodigies who get the right answer but cannot
say how. Are we to say that they do not calculate? (a family of cases. )

237. Imagine someone using a line as a rule in the following
way: he holds a pair of compasses, and carries one of its points along
the line that is the rule, while the other one draws the line that follows
the rule. And while he moves along the ruling line he alters the open
ing of the compasses, apparently with great precision, looking at the
rule the whole time as if it determined what he did. And watching him
we see no kind of regularity in this opening and shutting of the com
passes. We cannot learn his way of following the line from it. Here
perhaps one really would say: the original seems to intimate to him
which way he is to go. But it is not a rule.

238. The rule can only seem to me to produce all its consequences
in advance if i draw them as a matter of course . As much as it is a matter

88 e

philosophical investigations i

of course for me to call this colour blue. (criteria for the fact that
something is a matter of course for me. )

239. How is he to know what colour he is to pick out when he
hears red? Quite simple: he is to take the colour whose image
occurs to him when he hears the word. But how is he to know which
colour it is whose image occurs to him? Is a further criterion needed
for that? (there is indeed such a procedure as choosing the colour
which occurs to one when one hears the word

 red means the colour that occurs to me when i hear the word
red would be a definition . Not an explanation of what it is to use
a word as a name.

240. Disputes do not break out (among mathematicians, say) over
the question whether a rule has been obeyed or not. People dont
come to blows over it, for example. That is part of the framework
on which the working of our language is based (for example, in giving
descriptions).

241. So you are saying that human agreement decides what is
true and what is false? It is what human beings say that is true and
false; and they agree in the language they use. That is not agreement in
opinions but in form of life.

242. If language is to be a means of communication there must
be agreement not only in definitions but also (queer as this may
sound) in judgments. This seems to abolish logic, but does not do so.
It is one thing to describe methods of measurement, and another to
obtain and state results of measurement. But what we call measuring
is partly determined by a certain constancy in results of measurement.

243. A human being can encourage himself, give himself orders,
obey, blame and punish himself; he can ask himself a question and
answer it. We could even imagine human beings who spoke only in
monologue; who accompanied their activities by talking to themselves.
An explorer who watched them and listened to their talk might
succeed in translating their language into ours. (this would enable
him to predict these peoples actions correctly, for he also hears them
making resolutions and decisions. )

but could we also imagine a language in which a person could write
down or give vocal expression to his inner experienceshis feelings,

moods, and the restfor his private use? -well, cant we do so

in our ordinary language? But that is not what i mean. The

philosophical investigations i 8 9 e

individual words of this language are to refer to what can only be
known to the person speaking; to his immediate private sensations.
So another person cannot understand the language.

244. How do words refer to sensations? There doesnt seem to
be any problem here; dont we talk about sensations every day, and
give them names? But how is the connexion between the name and
the thing named set up? This question is the same as: how does a
human being learn the meaning of the names of sensations? Of the
word pain for example. Here is one possibility: words are connected
with the primitive, the natural, expressions of the sensation and used in
their place. A child has hurt himself and he cries; and then adults talk
to him and teach him exclamations and, later, sentences. They teach
the child new pain-behaviour.

So you are saying that the word pain really means crying?
On the contrary: the verbal expression of pain replaces crying and does
not describe it.

245. For how can i go so far as to try to use language to get
between pain and its expression?

246. In what sense are my sensations private ? Well, only i can
know whether i am really in pain; another person can only surmise
it. In one way this is wrong, and in another nonsense. If we are using
the word to know as it is normally used (and how else are we to
use it? ), then other people very often know when i am in pain.
Yes, but all the same not with the certainty with which i know it
myself 1 it cant be said of me at all (except perhaps as a joke) that i
know i am in pain. What is it supposed to meanexcept perhaps that
i am in pain?

Other people cannot be said to learn of my sensations only from my
behaviour, for i cannot be said to learn of them. I have them.

The truth is: it makes sense to say about other people that they
doubt whether i am in pain; but not to say it about myself.

247. Only you can know if you had that intention. One might
tell someone this when one was explaining the meaning of the word
intention to him. For then it means: that is how we use it.

(and here know means that the expression of uncertainty is
senseless. )

philosophical investigations i

90

248. The proposition sensations are private is comparable to:
one plays patience by oneself.

249. Are we perhaps over-hasty in our assumption that the smile
of an unweaned infant is not a pretence? And on what experience is
our assumption based?

(lying is a language-game that needs to be learned like any other
one. )

2jo. Why cant a dog simulate pain? Is he too honest? Could one
teach a dog to simulate pain? Perhaps it is possible to teach him to
howl on particular occasions as if he were in pain, even when he is
not. But the surroundings which are necessary for this behaviour to be
real simulation are missing.

2 j 1. What does it mean when we say: i cant imagine the opposite
of this or what would it be like, if it were otherwise? For example,
when someone has said that my images are private, or that only i
myself can know whether i am feeling pain, and similar things.

Of course, here i cant imagine the opposite doesnt mean: my
powers of imagination are unequal to the task. These words are a
defence against something whose form makes it look like an empirical
proposition, but which is really a grammatical one.

But why do we say: i cant imagine the opposite? Why not:
i cant imagine the thing itself?

Example: every rod has a length. That means something like: we
call something (or this) the length of a rodbut nothing the
length of a sphere. Now can i imagine every rod having a length?
Well, i simply imagine a rod. Only this picture, in connexion with this
proposition, has a quite different role from one used in connexion with
the proposition this table has the same length as the one over there.
For here i understand what it means to have a picture of the opposite
(nor need it be a mental picture).

But the picture attaching to the grammatical proposition could only
shew, say, what is called the length of a rod. And what should the
opposite picture be?

((remark about the negation of an a priori proposition. ))

252. This body has extension. To this we might reply: non
sense! But are inclined to reply of course! Why is this?

Philosophical investigations i

91

253. Another person cant have my pains. Which are my
pains? What counts as a criterion of identity here? Consider what
makes it possible in the case of physical objects to speak of two
exactly the same, for example, to say this chair is not the one you
saw here yesterday, but is exactly the same as it.

In so far as it makes sense to say that my pain is the same as his, it is
also possible for us both to have the same pain. (and it would also be
imaginable for two people to feel pain in the samenot just the
correspondingplace. That might be the case with siamese twins,
for instance. )

i have seen a person in a discussion on this subject strike himself
on the breast and say: but surely another person cant have this
painlthe answer to this is that one does not define a criterion of
identity by emphatic stressing of the word this. Rather, what the
emphasis does is to suggest the case in which we are conversant with
such a criterion of identity, but have to be reminded of it.

254. The substitution of identical for the same (for instance)
is another typical expedient in philosophy. As if we were talking about
shades of meaning and all that were in question were to find words
to hit on the correct nuance. That is in question in philosophy only
wherewe have to give a psychologically exact account of the temptation
to use a particular kind of expression. What we are tempted to say
in such a case is, of course, not philosophy; but it is its raw material.
Thus, for example, what a mathematician is inclined to say about the
objectivity and reality of mathematical facts, is not a philosophy of
mathematics, but something for philosophical treatment .

255. The philosophers treatment of a question is like the treatment
of an illness.

256. Now, what about the language which describes my inner
experiences and which only i myself can understand? How do i use
words to stand for my sensations? As we ordinarily do? Then are my
words for sensations tied up with my natural expressions of sensation?
In that case my language is not a private one. Someone else might
understand it as well as i. But suppose i didnt have any natural
expression for the sensation, but only had the sensation? And now
i simply associate names with sensations and use these names in
descriptions.

Philosophical investigations i

92

257. What would it be like if human beings shewed no outward
signs of pain (did not groan, grimace, etc. )? Then it would be impos
sible to teach a child the use of the word 'tooth-ache. Well, lets
assume the child is a genius and itself invents a name for the sensation 1
but then, of course, he couldnt make himself understood when he
used the word. So does he understand the name, without being able
to explain its meaning to anyone? But what does it mean to say
that he has 'named his pain? How has he done this naming of pain? !
And whatever he did, what was its purpose? When one says he
gave a name to his sensation one forgets that a great deal of stage
setting in the language is presupposed if the mere act of naming is to
make sense. And when we speak of someones having given a name
to pain, what is presupposed is the existence of the grammar of the
word pain; it shews the post where the new word is stationed.

258. Let us imagine the following case. I want to keep a diary
about the recurrence of a certain sensation. To this end i associate
it with the sign s and write this sign in a calendar for every day

on which i have the sensation. -1 will remark first of all that a

definition of the sign cannot be formulated. But still i can give myself
a kind of ostensive definition. How? Can i point to the sensation?
Not in the ordinary sense. But i speak, or write the sign down, and
at the same time i concentrate my attention on the sensationand so,
as it were, point to it inwardly. But what is this ceremony for?
For that is all it seems to be! A definition surely serves to establish
the meaning of a sign. Well, that is done precisely by the concentra
ting of my attention; for in this way i impress on myself the connexion
between the sign and the sensation. But i impress it on myself
can only mean: this process brings it about that i remember the
connexion right in the future. But in the present case i have no criterion
of correctness. One would like to say: whatever is going to seem right
to me is right. And that only means that here we cant talk about
'right.

259. Are the rules of the private language impressions of rules?
The balance on which impressions are weighed is not the impression
of a balance.

260. Well, i believe that this is the sensation s again. Perhaps
you believe that you believe it i

then did the man who made the entry in the calendar make a note

philosophical investigations i 93 e

of nothing whatever} dont consider it a matter of course that a person
is making a note of something when he makes a marksay in a
calendar. For a note has a function, and this s so far has none.

(one can talk to oneself. If a person speaks when no one else is
present, does that mean he is speaking to himself? )

261. What reason have we for calling s the sign for a sensation ?
For sensation is a word of our common language, not of one intel
ligible to me alone. So the use of this word stands in need of a justifica
tion which everybody understands. And it would not help either to
say that it need not be a sensation ; that when he writes s, he has
something and that is all that can be said. Has and something
also belong to our common language. So in the end when one is
doing philosophy one gets to the point where one would like just to
emit an inarticulate sound. But such a sound is an expression only
as it occurs in a particular language-game, which should now be
described.

262. It might be said: if you have given yourself a private definition
of a word, then you must inwardly undertake to use the word in such-
and-such away. And how do you undertake that? Is it to be assumed
that you invent the technique of using the word; or that you found it
ready-made?

263. But i can (inwardly) undertake to call this pain in the
future. But is it certain that you have undertaken it? Are you sure
that it was enough for this purpose to concentrate your attention on
your feeling? A queer question.

264. Once you know what the word stands for, you understand it,
you know its whole use.

265. Let us imagine a table (something like a dictionary) that
exists only in our imagination. A dictionary can be used to justify
the translation of a word x by a word y. But are we also to call it
a justification if such a table is to be looked up only in the imagination?
Well, yes; then it is a subjective justification. But justification
consists in appealing to something independent. But surely i can
appeal from one memory to another. For example, i dont know if i
have remembered the time of departure of a train right and to check
it i call to mind how a page of the time-table looked. Isnt it the same
here? No; for this process has got to produce a memory which is

philosophical investigations i

94 e

actually correct\ if the mental image of the time-table could not itself
be tested for correctness, how could it confirm the correctness of the
first memory? (as if someone were to buy several copies of the morn
ing paper to assure himself that what it said was true. )

looking up a table in the imagination is no more looking up a table
than the image of the result of an imagined experiment is the result of
an experiment.

266. I can look at the clock to see what time it is: but i can also
look at the dial of a clock in order to guess what time it is; or for the
same purpose move the hand of a clock till its position strikes me as
right. So the look of a clock may serve to determine the time in more
than one way. (looking at the clock in imagination. )

267. Suppose i wanted to justify the choice of dimensions for a
bridge which i imagine to be building, by making loading tests on
the material of the bridge in my imagination. This would, of course,
be to imagine what is called justifying the choice of dimensions for a
bridge. But should we also call it justifying an imagined choice of
dimensions?

268. Why cant my right hand give my left hand money? My
right hand can put it into my left hand. My right hand can write a
deed of gift and my left hand a receipt. But the further practical
consequences would not be those of a gift. When the left hand has
taken the money from the right, etc. , we shall ask: well, and what of
it? And the same could be asked if a person had given himself a
private definition of a word; i mean, if he has said the word to himself
and at the same time has directed his attention to a sensation.

269. Let us remember that there are certain criteria in a mans
behaviour for the fact that he does not understand a word: that it
means nothing to him, that he can do nothing with it. And criteria
for his thinking he understands, attaching some meaning to the word,
but not the right one. And, lastly, criteria for his understanding the
word right. In the second case one might speak of a subjective under
standing. And sounds which no one else understands but which i
appear to understand  might be called a private language.

270. Let us now imagine a use for the entry of the sign s in my
diary. I discover that whenever i have a particular sensation a mano-

9j e

philosophical investigations i

meter shews that my blood-pressure rises. So i shall be able to say
that my blood-pressure is rising without using any apparatus. This is
a useful result. And now it seems quite indifferent whether i have
recognized the sensation right or not. Let us suppose i regularly
identify it wrong, it does not matter in the least. And that alone shews
that the hypothesis that i make a mistake is mere show. (we as it were
turned a knob which looked as if it could be used to turn on some part
of the machine; but it was a mere ornament, not connected with the
mechanism at all. )

and what is our reason for calling s the name of a sensation here?

Perhaps the kind of way this sign is employed in this language-game. _

and why a particular sensation, that is, the same one every time?
Well, arent we supposing that we write s every time?

27 x. Imagine a person whose memory could not retain what the
word pain meantso that he constantly called different things by
that namebut nevertheless used the word in a way fitting in with the
usual symptoms and presuppositions of painin short he uses it as we
all do. Here i should like to say: a wheel that can be turned though
nothing else moves with it, is not part of the mer-hankm

272. The essential thing about private experience is really not that
each person possesses his own exemplar, but that nobody knows
whether other people also have this or something else. The assumption
would thus be possiblethough unverifiablethat one section of
mankind had one sensation of red and another section another.

273. What am i to say about the word red? That it means some
thing confronting us all and that everyone should really have another
word, besides this one, to mean his own sensation of red? Or is it like
this: the word red means something known to everyone; and in
addition, for each person, it means something known only to him? (or
perhaps rather: it refers to something known only to him. )

274. Of course, saying that the word red refers to instead of
means something private does not help us in the least to grasp its
function; but it is the more psychologically apt expression for a par
ticular experience in doing philosophy. It is as if when i uttered the
word i cast a sidelong glance at the private sensation, as it were in order
to say to myself: i know all right what i mean by it.

Philosophical investigations i

96c

275. Look at the blue of the sky and say to yourself how blue
the sky is! When you do it spontaneouslywithout philosophical
intentionsthe idea never crosses your mind that this impression of
colour belongs only to you. And you have no hesitation in exclaiming
that to someone else. And if you point at anything as you say the
words you point at the sky. I am saying: you have not the feeling of
pointing-into-yourself, which often accompanies naming the sensa
tion when one is thinking about private language. Nor do you think
that really you ought not to point to the colour with your hand, but
with your attention. (consider what it means to point to something
with the attention. )

276. But dont we at least mean something quite definite when we
look at a colour and name our colour-impression? It is as if we
detached the colour -impression from the object, like a membrane.
(this ought to arouse our suspicions. )

277. But how is even possible for us to be tempted to think that
we use a word to mean at one time the colour known to everyoneand
at another the visual impression which i am getting nowi how can

there be so much as a temptation here? -1 dont turn the same kind

of attention on the colour in the two cases. When i mean the colour
impression that (as i should like to say) belongs to me alone i immerse
myself in the colourrather like when i cannot get my fill of a
colour. Hence it is easier to produce this experience when one is
looking at a bright colour, or at an impressive colour-scheme.

278. I know how the colour green looks to me surely that makes
sense! Certainly: what use of the proposition are you thinking of?

279. Imagine someone saying: but i know how tall i am! And
laying his hand on top of his head to prove it.

280. Someone paints a picture in order to shew how he imagines
a theatre scene. And now i say: this picture has a double function:

it informs others, as pictures or words inform-but for the one

who gives the information it is a representation (or piece of informa
tion? ) of another kind: for him it is the picture of his image, as it
cant be for anyone else. To him his private impression of the picture
means what he has imagined, in a sense in which the picture cannot
mean this to others. And what right have i to speak in this second

philosophical investigations i

97 e

case of a representation or piece of informationif these words were
rightly used in the first case?

281. But doesnt what you say come to this: that there is no pain,
for example, without pain-behaviour}' it comes to this: only of a living
human being and what resembles (behaves like) a living human being
can one say: it has sensations; it sees; is blind; hears; is deaf; is conscious
or unconscious.

282. But in a fairy tale the pot too can see and hear! (certainly;
but it can also talk. )

but the fairy tale only invents what is not the case: it does not talk
nonsense it is not as simple as that. Is it false or nonsensical to say
that a pot talks? Have we a clear picture of the circumstances in which
we should say of a pot that it talked? (even a nonsense-poem is not
nonsense in the same way as the babbling of a child. )

we do indeed say of an inanimate thing that it is in pain: when play
ing with dolls for example. But this use of the concept of pain is a
secondary one. Imagine a case in which people ascribed pain only to
inanimate things; pitied only dolls! (when children play at trains their
game is connected with their knowledge of trains. It would neverthe
less be possible for the children of a tribe unacquainted with trains to
learn this game from others, and to play it without knowing that it was
copied from anything. One might say that the game did not make
the same sense to them as to us. )

283. What gives us so much as the idea that living beings, things,
can feel?

Is it that my education has led me to it by drawing my attention
to feelings in myself, and now i transfer the idea to objects outside
myself? That i recognize that there is something there (in me) which
i can call pain without getting into conflict with the way other people
use this word? I do not transfer my idea to stones, plants, etc.

Couldnt i imagine having frightful pains and turning to stone while
they lasted? Well, how do i know, if i shut my eyes, whether i have
not turned into a stone? And if that has happened, in what sense will
the stone have the pains? In what sense will they be ascribable to the
stone? And why need the pain have a bearer at all here? !

And can one say of the stone that it has a soul and that is what has
the pain? What has a soul, or pain, to do with a stone?

9 8e philosophical investigations i

only of what behaves like a human being ean one say that it has
pains.

For one has to say it of a body, or, if you like of a soul which some
body has. And how can a body have a soul?

284. Look at a stone and imagine it having sensations. One says
to oneself: how could one so much as get the idea of ascribing a
sensation to a thing? One might as well ascribe it to a number! And
now look at a wriggling fly and at once these difficulties vanish and
pain seems able to get a foothold here, where before everything was,
so to speak, too smooth for it.

And so, too, a corpse seems to us quite inaccessible to pain. Our
attitude to what is alive and to what is dead, is not the same. All our
reactions are different. If anyone says: that cannot simply come
from the fact that a living thing moves about in such-and-such a way
and a dead one not, then i want to intimate to him that this is a
case of the transition from quantity to quality.

285. Think of the recognition of facial expressions. Or of the
description of facial expressionswhich does not consist in giving the
measurements of the face! Think, too, how one can imitate a mans
face without seeing ones own in a mirror.

286. But isnt it absurd to say of a body that it has pain? -and

why does one feel an absurdity in that? In what sense is it true that
my hand does not feel pain, but i in my hand?

What sort of issue is: is it the body that feels pain? How is it to be
decided? What makes it plausible to say that it is not the body?
Well, something like this: if someone has a pain in his hand, then the
hand does not say so (unless it writes it) and one does not comfort
the hand, but the sufferer: one looks into his face.

287. How am i filled with pity for this marii how does it come
out what the object of my pity is? (pity, one may say, is a form of
conviction that someone else is in pain. )

288. I turn to stone and my pain goes on. Suppose i were in

error and it was no longer pain ? -but i cant be in error here;

it means nothing to doubt whether i am in pain! That means: if
anyone said i do not know if what i have got is a pain or something
else, we should think something like, he does not know what the

philosophical investigations i 99 e

english word pain means; and we should explain it to him. How?
Perhaps by means of gestures, or by pricking him with a pin and saying:
see, thats what pain is! This explanation, like any other, he might
understand right, wrong, or not at all. And he will shew which he does
by his use of the word, in this as in other cases.

If he now said, for example: oh, i know what pain means;
what i dont know is whether this, that 1 have now, is painwe should
merely shake our heads and be forced to regard his words as a queer
reaction which we have no idea what to do with. (it would be rather
as if we heard someone say seriously: i distinctly remember that some
time before i was born i believed.. )

that expression of doubt has no place in the language-game; but
if we cut out human behaviour, which is the expression of sensation, it
looks as if i might legitimately begin to doubt afresh. My temptation to
say that one might take a sensation for something other than what it is
arises from this: if i assume the abrogation of the normal language-
game with the expression of a sensation, i need a criterion of identity
for the sensation; and then the possibility of error also exists.

289. When i say i am in pain i am at any rate justified before
myself what does that mean? Does it mean: if someone else could
know what i am calling pain, he would admit that i was using the
word correctly?

To use a word without a justification does not mean to use it without
right.

290. What i do is not, of course, to identify my sensation by criteria:
but to repeat an expression. But this is not the end of the
language-game: it is the beginning.

But isnt the beginning the sensationwhich i describe? Perhaps
this word describe tricks us here. I say i describe my state of mind
and i describe my room. You need to call to mind the differences
between the language-games.

291. What we call  descriptions  are instruments for particular
uses. Think of a machine-drawing, a cross-section, an elevation with
measurements, which an engineer has before him. Thinking of a
description as a word-picture of the facts has something misleading
about it: one tends to think only of such pictures as hang on our walls:
which seem simply to portray how a thing looks, what it is like. (these
pictures are as it were idle. )

100 e philosophical investigations i

292. Dont always think that you read off what you say from the
facts; that you portray these in words according to rules. For even so
you would have to apply the rule in the particular case without
guidance.

293. If i say of myself that it is only from my own case that i know
what the word pain meansmust i not say the same of other people
too? And how can i generalize the one case so irresponsibly?

Now someone tells me that he knows what pain is only from his own

cas el-suppose everyone had a box with something in it: we call it

a beetle. No one can look into anyone elses box, and everyone says
he knows what a beetle is only by looking at his beetle. Here it would
be quite possible for everyone to have something different in his box.
One might even imagine such a thing constantly changing. But
suppose the word beetle had a use in these peoples language? If
so it would not be used as the name of a thing. The thing in the box
has no place in the language-game at all; not even as a something:
for the box might even be empty. No, one can divide through by
the thing in the box; it cancels out, whatever it is.

That is to say: if we construe the grammar of the expression of
sensation on the model of object and designation the object drops
out of consideration as irrelevant.

294. If you say he sees a private picture before him, which he is
describing, you have still made an assumption about what he has
before him- and that means that you can describe it or do describe it
more closely. If you admit that you havent any notion what kind of
thing it mi ght be that he has before himthen what leads you into
saying, in spite of that, that he has something before him? Isnt it
as if i were to say of someone: he has something. But i dont know
whether it is money, or debts, or an empty till.

29 5. I know_only from my own casewhat kind of proposition

is this meant to be at all? An experiential one? No. A grammatical
one?

Suppose everyone does say about himself that he knows what pain
is only from his own pain. Not that people really say that, or are even

prepared to say it. But if everybody said it-it might be a kind of

exclamation. And even if it gives no information, still it is a picture,
and why should we not want to call up such a picture? Imagine an
allegorical painting take the place of those words.

When we look into ourselves as we do philosophy, we often get to

philosophical investigations i ioie

see just such a picture. A full-blown pictorial representation of our
grammar. Not facts; but as it were illustrated turns of speech.

296. Yes, but there is something there all the same accompanying
my cry of pain. And it is on account of that that i utter it. And this
something is what is importantand frightful. Only whom are we
informing of this? And on what occasion?

297. Of course, if water boils in a pot, steam comes out of the pot
and also pictured steam comes out of the pictured pot. But what if one
insisted on saying that there must also be something boiling in the
picture of the pot?

298. The very fact that we should so much like to say: this is
the important thingwhile we point privately to the sensation
is enough to shew how much we are inclined to say something which
gives no information.

299. Being unablewhen we surrender ourselves to philosophical
thoughtto help saying such-and-such; being irresistibly inclined to say
itdoes not mean being forced into an assumption , or having an
immediate perception or knowledge of a state of affairs.

300. It iswe should like to saynot merely the picture of the
behaviour that plays a part in the language-game with the words he
is in pain, but also the picture of the pain. Or, not merely the para
digm of the behaviour, but also that of the pain. It is a misunder
standing to say the picture of pain enters into the language-game
with the word pain. The image of pain is not a picture and this
image is not replaceable in the language-game by anything that we
should call a picture. The image of pain certainly enters into the
language game in a sense; only not as a picture.

301. An image is not a picture, but a picture can correspond to it.

302. If one has to imagine someone elses pain on the model of
ones own, this is none too easy a thing to do: for i have to imagine
pain which i do not feel on the model of the pain which i do feel. That
is, what i have to do is not simply to make a transition in imagination
from one place of pain to another. As, from pain in the hand to pain
in the arm. For i am not to imagine that i feel pain in some region of
his body. (which would also be possible. )

pain-behaviour can point to a painful placebut the subject of pain
is the person who gives it expression.

102 

philosophical investigations i

305. I can only believe that someone else is in pain, but i know it
if i am. Yes: one can make the decision to say i believe he is in

pain instead of he is in pain. But that is all. -what looks like

an explanation here, or like a statement about a mental process, is in
truth an exchange of one expression for another which, while we are
doing philosophy, seems the more appropriate one.

Just tryin a real caseto doubt someone elses fear or pain.

304. But you will surely admit that there is a difference between
pain-behaviour accompanied by pain and pain-behaviour without any
pain? Admit it? What greater difference could there be? And yet
you again and again reach the conclusion that the sensation itself is a
nothing not at all. It is not a somethings but not a nothing either!
The conclusion was only that a nothing would serve just as well as a
something about which nothing could be said. We have only rejected
the grammar which tries to force itself on us here.

The paradox disappears only if we make a radical break with the
idea~that language always functions in one way, always serves the
same purpose: to convey thoughtswhich may be about houses, pains,
good and evil, or anything else you please.

305. But you surely cannot deny that, for example, in remember
ing, an inner process takes place. What gives the impression that
we want to deny anything? When one says still, an inner process
does take place hereone wants to go on: after all, you see it.
And it is this inner process that one means by the word remember
ing. The impression that we wanted to deny something arises from
our setting our faces against the picture of the inner process'. What
we deny is that the picture of the inner process gives us the correct
idea of the use of the word to remember. We say that this picture
with its ramifications stands in the way of our seeing the use of the
word as it is.

306. Why should i deny that there is a mental process? But
there has just taken plac in me the mental process of remember
ing . . . . Means nothing more than: i have just remembered . . . ..
To deny the mental process would mean to deny the remembering;
to deny that anyone ever remembers anything.

307. Are you not really a behaviourist in disguise? Aren't you
at bottom really saying that everything except human behaviour is

philosophical investigations i

103

a fiction? If i do speak of a fiction, then it is of a grammatical
fiction.

508. How does the philosophical problem about mental processes

and states and about behaviourism arise? -the first step is the one

that altogether escapes notice. We talk of processes and states and
leave their nature undecided. Sometime perhaps we shall know
more about themwe think. But that is just what commits us to a
particular way of looking at the matter. For we have a definite concept
of what it means to learn to know a process better. (the decisive
movement in the conjuring trick has been made, and it was the very
one that we thought quite innocent. )and now the analogy which
was to make us understand our thoughts falls to pieces. So we have to
deny the yet uncomprehended process in the yet unexplored medium.
And now it looks as if we had denied mental processes. And naturally
we dont want to deny them.

309. What is your aim in philosophy? To shew the fly the way out
of the fly-bottle.

310. I tell someone i am in pain. His attitude to me will then be
that of belief; disbelief; suspicion; and so on.

Let us assume he says: its not so bad. Doesnt that prove that

he believes in something behind the outward expression of pain? -

his attitude is a proof of his attitude. Imagine not merely the words
i am in pain but also the answer its not so bad replaced by
instinctive noises and gestures.

311. What difference could be greater? In the case of pain i
believe that i can give myself a private exhibition of the difference.
But i can give anyone an exhibition of the difference between a broken
and an unbroken tooth. But for the private exhibition you dont
have to give yourself actual pain; it is enough to imagine itfor
instance, you screw up your face a bit. And do you know that what you
are giving yourself this exhibition of is pain and not, for example, a
facial expression? And how do you know what you are to give
yourself an exhibition of before you do it? This private exhibition is an
illusion.

312. But again, areiit the cases of the tooth and the pain similar?
For the visual sensation in the one corresponds to the sensation of
pain in the other. I can exhibit the visual sensation to myself as little
or as well as the sensation of pain.

Ic>4 e philosophical investigations i

let us imagine the following: the surfaces of the things around us
(stones, plants, etc. ) have patches and regions which produce pain
in our skin when we touch them. (perhaps through the chemical
composition of these surfaces. But we need not know that. ) in this
case we should speak of pain-patches on the leaf of a particular plant
just as at present we speak of red patches. I am supposing that it is
useful to us to notice these patches and their shapes; that we can infer
important properties of the objects from them.

513. I can exhibit pain, as i exhibit red, and as i exhibit straight
and crooked and trees and stones . That is what we call exhibiting.

314. It shews a fundamental misunderstanding, if i am inclined to
study the headache i have now in order to get clear about the philo
sophical problem of sensation.

31j. Could someone understand the word pain, who had never
felt pain? Is experience to teach me whether this is so or not?
And if we say a man could not imagine pain without having some
time felt ithow do we know? How can it_be decided whether it is
true?

316. In order to get clear about the meaning of the word think
we watch ourselves while we think; what we observe will be what the
word means ! But this concept is not used like that. (it would be as
if without knowing how to play chess, i were to try and make out
what the word mate meant by close observation of the last move of
some game of chess. )

317. Misleading parallel: the expression of pain is a crythe
expression of thought, a proposition.

As if the purpose of the proposition were to convey to one person
how it is with another: only, so to speak, in his thinking part and not
in his stomach.

318. Suppose we think while we talk or write^-i mean, as we
normally dowe shall not in general say that we think quicker than
we talk; the thought seems not to be separate from the expression.
On the other hand, however, one does speak of the speed of thought;
of how a thought goes through ones head like lightning; how problems
become clear to us in a flash, and so on. So it is natural to ask if
the same thing happens in lightning-like thoughtonly extremely
acceleratedas when we talk and think while we talk. So that in the

philosophical investigations i

ioje

first case the clockwork runs down all at once, but in the second bit
by bit, braked by the words.

319. I can see or understand a whole thought in a flash in exactly
the sense in which i can make a note of it in a few words or a few
pencilled dashes.

What makes this note into an epitome of this thought?

320. The lightning-like thought may be connected with the
spoken thought as the algebraic formula is with the sequence of
numbers which i work out from it.

When, for example, i am given an algebraic function, i am
certain that i shall be able to work out its values for the arguments
1, 2, 3, . . . Up to 10. This certainty will be called 'well-founded,
for i have learned to compute such functions, and so on. In other
cases no reasons will be given for itbut it will be justified by success.

321. "what happens when a man suddenly understands? The
question is badly framed. If it is a question about the meaning of the
expression "sudden understanding, the answer is not to point to a
process that we give this name to. The question might mean: what
are the tokens of sudden understanding; what are its characteristic
psychical accompaniments?

(there is no ground for assuming that a man feels the facial move
ments that go with his expression, for example, or the alterations in
his breathing that are characteristic of some emotion. Even if he feels
them as soon as his attention is directed towards them. ) ((posture. ))

322. The question what the expression means is not answered by
such a description; and this misleads us into concluding that under
standing is a specific indefinable experience. But we forget that
what should interest us is the question: how do we compare these
experiences; what criterion of identity do we fix for their occurrence?

323. "now i know how to go on i is an exclamation; it corres
ponds to an instinctive sound, a glad start. Of course it does not
follow from my feeling that i shall not find i am stuck when i do
try to go on. Here there are cases in which i should say: "when i
said i knew how to go on, i did know. One will say that if, for
example, an unforeseen interruption occurs. But what is unforeseen
must not simply be that i get stuck.

Philosophical investigations i

lo6e

we could also imagine a case in which light was always seeming
to dawn on someonehe exclaims now i have it! And then can
never justify himself in practice. It might seem to him as if in the
twinkling of an eye he forgot again the meaning of the picture that
occurred to him.

324. Would it be correct to say that it is a matter of induction,
and that i am as certain that i shall be able to continue the series, as i
am that this book will drop on the ground when i let it go; and that
i should be no less astonished if i suddenly and for no obvious
reason got stuck in working out the series, than i should be if the book
remained hanging in the air instead of falling? To that i will reply
that we dont need any grounds for this certainty either. What could
justify the certainty better than success?

325. The certainty that i shall be able to go on after i have had
this experienceseen the formula, for instance, is simply based on
induction. What does this mean? The certainty that the fire will
burn me is based on induction. Does that mean that i argue to
myself: fire has always burned me, so it will happen now too?
Or is the previous experience the cause of my certainty, not its , groun d?
Whether the earlier experience is the cause of the certainty depends
on the system of hypotheses, of natural laws, in which we are con
sidering the phenomenon of certainty.

Is our confidence justified? What^people accept as a justification
is shewn by how they think and live.

326. We expect this, and are surprised at that but the chain of
reasons has an end.

327. Can one think without speaking? And what is thin kin g! 
Well, dont you ever think? Cant you observe yourself and see what
is going on? It should be quite simple. You do not have to wait for it
as for an astronomical event and then perhaps make your observation
in a hurry.

328. Well, what does one include in thinking? What has one
learnt to use this word for? If i say i have thoughtneed i always
be right? What kind of mistake is there room for here? Are there
circumstances in which one would ask: was what i was doing then
really thinking; am i not making a mistake? Suppose someone takes
a measurement in the middle of a train of thought: has he interrupted
the thought if he says nothing to himself during the measuring?

Philosophical investigations i 107

329. When i think in language, there arent meanings going
through my mind in addition to the verbal expressions: the language is
itself the vehicle of thought.

330. Is thinking a kind of speaking? One would like to say it is
what distinguishes speech with thought from talking without thinking.
And so it seems to be an accompaniment of speech. A process,
which may accompany something else, or can go on by itself.

Say: yes, this pen is blunt. Oh well, itll do. First, thinking it;
then without thought; then just think the thought without the words.
Well, while doing some writing i might test the point of my pen,
make a faceand then go on with a gesture of resignation. I might
also act in such a way while taking various measurements that an on
looker would say i hadwithout wordsthought: if two magnitudes
are equal to a third, they are equal to one another. But what con
stitutes thought here is not some process which has to accompany
the words if they are not to be spoken without thought.

331. Imagine people who could only think aloud. (as there are
people who can only read aloud. )

332. While we sometimes call it thinking to accompany a

sentence by a mental process, that accompaniment is not what we
mean by a thought. -say a sentence and think it; say it with under

standing. And now do not say it, and just do what you accompanied
it with when you said it with understanding! (sing this tune with
expression. And now dont sing it, but repeat its expression! And
here one actually might repeat something. For example, motions of
the body, slower and faster breathing, and so on. )

333. Only someone who is convinced can say that. How does
the conviction help him when he says it? Is it somewhere at hand by
the side of the spoken expression? (or is it masked by it, as a soft
sound by a loud one, so that it can, as it were, no longer be heard
when one expresses it out loud? ) what if someone were to say in
order to be able to sing a tune from memory one has to hear it in
ones mind and sing from that?

334. So you really wanted to say . . . . We use this phrase
in order to lead someone from one form of expression to another.
One is tempted to use the following picture: what he really wanted to
say, what he meant was already present somewhere in his mind even

, o8 philosophical investigations i

before we gave it expression. Various kinds of thing may persuade
us to give up one expression and to adopt another in its place. To
understand this, it is useful to consider the relation in which the
solutions of mathematical problems stand to the context and ground of
their formulation. The concept trisection of the angle with ruler
and compass, when people are trying to do it, and, on the other hand,
when it has been proved that there is no such thing.

335. What happens when we make an effortsay in writing a
letterto find the right expression for our thoughts? This phrase
compares the process to one of translating or describing: the thoughts
are already there (perhaps were there in advance) and we merely
look for their expression. This picture is more or less appropriate in
different cases. But cant all sorts of things happen here? I su rrend er
to a mood and the expression comes. Or a picture occurs to me and i
try to describe it. Or an english expression occurs to me and i try
to hit on the corresponding german one. Or i make a gesture, and
ask myself: what words correspond to this gesture? And so on.

Now if it were asked: do you have the thought before finding
the expression? What would one have to reply? And w hat, to the
question: what did the thought consist in, as it existed before its
expression?

336. T his case is similar to the one in which someone imagines
that one could not think a sentence with the remarkable word order
of ger man or latin just as it stands. One first has to think it, and then
one arranges the words in that queer order. (a french politician once
wrote that it was a peculiarity of the french language that in it
words occur in the order in which one thinks them. )

337. But didnt i already intend the whole construction of the
sentence (for example) at its beginning? So surely it already existed in
my mind before i said it out loud! If it was in my mind, still it would
not normally be there in some different word order. But here we are
constructing a misleading picture of intending, that is, of the use of
this word. An intention is embedde d in its situation, in human
customs and institutions. If the technique of the game of chess did
not exist, i could not intend to play a game of chess. In so far as i do
intend the construction of a sentence in advance, that is made possible
by the fact that i can speak the language in question.

Philosophical investigations i io 9 e

338. After all, one can only say something if one has learned to
talk. Therefore in order to want to say something one must also have
mastered a language; and yet it is clear that one can want to speak
without speaking? Just as one can want to dance without dancing.

And when we think about this, we grasp at the image of dancing,
speaking, etc..

339. Thinking is not an incorporeal process which lends fife and
sen se to s peaking, and which it would be possible to detach from
speaking, rather as the devil took the shadow of schlemiehl from the

ground. -but how not an incorporeal process? Am i acquainted

with incorporeal processes, then, only thinking is not one of them?
No; i called the expression an incorporeal process to my aid in my
embarrassment when i was trying to explain the meaning of the word
thinking in a primitive way.

One might say thinking is an incorporeal process, however, if
one were using this to distinguish the grammar of the word think
from that of, say, the word eat. Only that makes the difference
between the meanings look too slight. (it is like saying: numerals are
actual, and numbers non-actual, objects. ) an unsuitable type of
expression is a sure means of remaining in a state of confusion. It as
it were bars the way out.

340. One cannot guess how a word functions. One has to look
at its use and learn from that.

But the difficulty is to remove the prejudice which stands in the way
of doing this. It is not a stupid prejudice.

341. Speech with and without thought is to be compared with the
playing of a piece of music with and without thought.

342 william james, in order to shew that thought is possible
without speech, quotes the recollection of a deaf-mute, mr. Ballard,
who wrote that in his early youth, even before he could speak, he
had had thoughts about god and the world. What can he have
meant? Ballard writes: it was during those delightful rides, some
two or three years before my initiation into the rudiments of written
language, that i began to ask myself the question: how came the
world into being? Are you sureone would like to askthat this
is the correct translation of your wordless thought into words? And
why does this questionwhich otherwise seems not to existraise
its head here? Do i want to say that the writers memory deceives

iioe

philosophical investigations i

him? I dont even know if i should say that . These recollections are
a queer memory phenomenon, and i do not know what conclusions
one can draw from them about the past of the man who recounts them.

343. The words with which i express my memory are my memory-
reaction.

344. Would it be imaginable that people should never speak an
audible language, but should still say things to themselves in the
imagination?

If people always said things only to themselves, then they would
merely be doing always what as it is they do sometimes so it is quite
easy to imagine this: one need only make the easy transition from some
to all. (like: an infinitely long row of trees is simply one that does
not come to an end. ) our criterion for someones saying something
to himself is what he tells us and the rest of his behaviour; and we only
say that someone speaks to himself if, in the ordinary sense of the
words, he can speak. And we do not say it of a parrot; nor of a
gramophone.

345. What sometimes happens might always happen. What
kind of proposition is that? It is like the following: if f (a) makes
sense (x). F(x) makes sense.

If it is possible for someone to make a false move in some game,
then it might be possible for everybody to make nothing but false
moves in every game. Thus we are under a temptation to misunder
stand the logic of our expressions here, to give an incorrect account
of the use of our words.

Orders are sometimes not obeyed. But what would it be like if no
i orders were ever obeyed? The concept order would have lost its
| purpose.

J 346. But couldnt we imagine gods suddenly giving a parrot
( understanding, and its now saying things to itself? But here it is an
i important fact that i imagined a deity in order to imagine this.

347. But at least i know from my own case what it means to
say things to oneself. And if i were deprived of the organs of speech,
i could still talk to myself.

If i know it only from my own case, then 1 know only what i call
that, not what anyone else does.

348. These deaf-mutes have learned only a gesture-language, but
each of them talks to himself inwardly in a vocal language. Now,

philosophical investigations i

me

dont you understand that? But how do i know whether i under
stand it? ! What can i do with this information (if it is such)? The
whole idea of understanding smells fishy here. I do not know whether
i am to say i understand it or dont understand it. I might answer
its an english sentence; apparently quite in orderthat is, until one
wants to do something with it; it has a connexion with other sentences
which makes it difficult for us to say that nobody really knows what
it tells us; but everyone who has not become calloused by doing
philosophy notices that there is something wrong here.

349. But this supposition surely makes good sense! Yes; in
ordinary circumstances these words and this picture have an application
with which we are familiar. But if we suppose a case in which this
application falls away we become as it were conscious for the first
time of the nakedness of the words and the picture.

350. But if i suppose that someone has a pain, then i am simply
supposing that he has just the same as i have so often had. That
gets us no further. It is as if i were to say: you surely know what
tt is 5 oclock here means; so you also know what its 5 oclock on
the sun means. It means simply that it is just the same time there as
it is here when it is 5 oclock. The explanation by means of identity
does not work here. For i know well enough that one can call 5 oclock
here and 5 oclock there the same time, but what i do not know is
in what cases one is to speak of its being the same time here and there.

In exactly the same way it is no explanation to say: the supposition
that he has a pain is simply the supposition that he has the same as i.
For that part of the grammar is quite clear to me: that is, that one will
say that the stove has the same experience as i, if one says: it is in pain
and i am in pain.

351. Yet we go on wanting to say: pain is painwhether he
has it, or i have it; and however i come to know whether he has a
pain or not. I might agree. And when you ask me dont you
know, then, what i mean when i say that the stove is in pain? I
can reply: these words may lead me to have all sorts of images; but
their usefulness goes no further. And i can also imagine something
in connexion with the words: it was just 5 oclock in the afternoon
on the sunsuch as a grandfather clock which points to 5. But a
still better example would be that of the application of above and
below to the earth. Here we all have a quite clear idea of what

h2c philosophical investigations i

above and below mean. I see well enough that i am on top;
the earth is surely beneath met (and dont smile at this example.
We are indeed all taught at school that it is stupid to talk like that.
But it is much easier to bury a problem than to solve it. ) and it is
only reflection that shews us that in this case above and below
cannot be used in the ordinary way. (that we might, for instance, say
that the people at the antipodes are below our part of the earth, but
it must also be recognized as right for them to use the same expression
about us. )

352. Here it happens that our thinking plays us a queer trick.
We want, that is, to quote the law of excluded middle and to say:
either such an image is in his mind, or it is not; there is no third
possibility iwe encounter this queer argument also in other regions
of philosophy. In the decimal expansion of tt either the group 7777
occurs, or it does notthere is no third possibility. That is to say:
^ god sees but we dont know. But what does that mean? We
use a picture; the picture of a visible series which one person sees the
whole of and another not. The law of excluded middle says here:
it must either look like this, or like that. So it reallyand this is a
truismsays nothing at all, but gives us a picture. And the problem
ought now to be: does reality accord with the picture or not? And this
picture seems to determine what we have to do, what to look for, and
howbut it does not do so, just because we do not know how it is to
be applied. Here saying there is no third possibility or but there
cant be a third possibility! Expresses our inability to turn our eyes
away from this picture: a picture which looks as if it must already
contain both the problem and its solution, while all the time we feel
that it is not so.

Similarly when it is said either he has this experience, or not
what primarily occurs to us is a picture which by itself seems to make
the sense of the expressions unmistakable : now you know what is in
questionwe should like to say. And that is precisely what it does
not tell him.

353. Asking whether and how a proposition can be verified is only
a particular way of asking how dyou mean? The answer is a
contribution to the grammar of the proposition.

354. The fluctuation in grammar between criteria and symptoms
makes it look as if there were nothing at all but symptoms. We say.

Philosophical investigations i

1136

for example: experience teaches that there is rain when the barometer
falls, but it also teaches that there is rain when we have certain
sensations of wet and cold, or such-and-such visual impressions. In
defence of this one says that these sense-impressions can deceive us.
But here one fails to reflect that the fact that the false appearance is
precisely one of rain is founded on a definition.

355. The point here is not that our sense-impressions can lie,
but that we understand their language. (and this language like any
other is founded on convention. )

356. One is inclined to say: either it is raining, or it isnthow i
know, how the information has reached me, is another matter.
But then let us put the question like this: what do i call information
that it is raining? (or have i only information of this information
too? ) and what gives this information 5 the character of information
about something? Doesnt the form of our expression mislead us here?
For isnt it a misleading metaphor to say: my eyes give me the informa
tion that there is a chair over there?

357. We do not say that possibly a dog talks to itself. Is that
because we are so minutely acquainted with its soul? Well, one might
say this: if one sees the behaviour of a living thing, one sees its soul.
But do i also say in my own case that i am saying something to my
self, because i am behaving in such-and-such a way? I do not say it
from observation of my behaviour. But it only makes sense because i do
behave in this way. Then it is not because i mean it that it makes sense?

358. But isnt it our 'meaning, it that gives sense to the sentence?
(and here, of course, belongs the fact that one cannot mean a senseless
series of words. ) and meaning it is something in the sphere of the
mind. But it is also something private! It is the intangible something;
only comparable to consciousness itself.

How could this seem ludicrous? It is, as it were, a dream of our
language.

359. Could a machine think? -could it be in pain? Well, is 1

the human body to be called such a machine? It surely comes as close s
as possible to being such a machine.

360. But a machine surely cannot think! Is that an empirical
statement? No. We only say of a human being and what is like one
that it thinks. We also say it of dolls and no doubt of spirits too.
Look at the word to think as a tool.

Philosophical investigations i

h 4 e

361. The chair is thinking to itself:.

Where? In one of its parts? Or outside its body; in the air
around it? Or not anywhere at all? But then what is the difference
between this chairs saying something to itself and another ones
doing so, next to it? But then how is it with man: where d oes h e say
things to himself? How does it come about that this question seems
senseless; and that no specification of a place is necessary except just
that this man is saying something to himself? Whereas the question
where the chair talks to itself seems to demand an answer. The reason
is: we want to know how the chair is supposed to be like a human
being; whether, for instance, the head is at the top of the back and so on.

What is it like to say something to oneself; what happens here?
How am i to explain it? Well, only as you might teach someone the
meaning of the expression to say something to oneself. And certainly
we learn the meaning of that as children. Only no one is going to
say that the person who teaches it to us tells us what takes place.

362. Rather it seems to us as though in this case the instructor
imparted the meaning to the pupilwithout telling him it directly;
but in the end the pupil is brought to the point of giving himself the
correct ostensive definition. And this is where our illusion is.

363. But when i imagine something, something certainly happens !
Well, something happensand then i make a noise. What for? Pre
sumably in order to tell what happens. But how is telling done? When
are we said to tell anything? What is the language-game of telling?

I should like to say: you regard it much too much as a matter of
/ course that one can tell anything to anyone. That is to say: we are
: so much accustomed to communication through language, in con-
i versation, that it looks to us as if the whole point of communication
lay in this: someone else grasps the sense of my wordswhich is
j something mental: he as it were takes it into his own mind. If he
! Then^does something further with it as well, that is no part of the
| immediate purpose of language.

One would like to say telling brings it about that he knows that
i am in pain; it produces this mental phenomenon; everything else is
inessential to the telling. As for what this queer phenomenon of
knowledge isthere is time enough for that. Mental processes just
are queer. (it is as if one said: the clock tells us the time. What
; time is, is not yet settled. And as for what one tells the time for that
doesnt come in here. )

philosophical investigations i

115c

364. Someone does a sum in his head. He uses the result, lets say,
for building a bridge or a machine. Are you trying to say that he
has not really arrived at this number by calculation? That it has, say,
just come to him in the manner of a kind of dream? There surely must
have been calculation going on, and there was. For he knows that,
and how, he calculated; and the correct result he got would be

inexplicable without calculation. -but what if i said: it strikes

him as if he had calculated. And why should the correct result be
explicable? Is it not incomprehensible enough, that without saying a
word, without making a note, he was able to calculate?

Is calculating in the imagination in some sense less real than
calculating on paper? It is real calculation-in-the-head. Is it like
calculation on paper? I dont know whether to call it like. Is a bit
of white paper with black lines on it like a human body?

365. Do adelheid and the bishop play a real game of chess? Of
course. They are not merely pretendingwhich would also be possible
as part of a play. But, for example, the game has no beginning!
Of course it has; otherwise it would not be a game of chess.

366. Is a sum in the head less real than a sum on paper? Perhaps
one is inclined to say some such thing; but one can get oneself to think
the opposite as well by telling oneself: paper, ink, etc. Are only logical
constructions out of our sense-data.

I have done the multiplication. In my headdo i perhaps

not believe such a statement? But was it really a multiplication? It
was not merely a multiplication, but this onein the head. This is
the point at which i go wrong. For i now want to say: it was some
mental process corresponding to the multiplication on paper. So it
would make sense to say:  this process in the mind corresponds to
this process on paper. And it would then make sense to talk of a
method of projection according to which thetmage of the sign was a
representation of the sign itself. ~

367. The mental picture is the picture which is described when
someone describes what he imagines.

368. I describe a room to someone, and then get him to paint an
impressionistic picture from this description to shew that he has
understood it. Now he paints the chairs which i described as green,
dark red; where i said yellow, he paints blue. That is the impression

u6e philosophical investigations i

which he got of that room. And now i say: quite right! Thats what

its like.

369. One would like to ask: what is it likewhat happens
when one does a sum in ones head? And in a particular case the

answer may be first i add 17 and 18, then i subtract 39.

But that is not the answer to our question. What is called doing sums
in ones head is not explained by such an answer.

370. One o ught to a sk, not whatimages a re or what happ ens when
one imagines anything, but how the word imagination i s used .
Butthathoes not mean that i want to talk only about words. For the
question as to the nature of the imagination is as much about the word
imagination as my question is. And i am only saying that this
question is not to be decided-r-neither for the person who does the
imagining, nor for anyone elseby pointing; nor yet by a description
of any process. The first question also asks for a word to be ex
plained; but it makes us expect a wrong kind of answer.

371. Essence is expressed by grammar.

372. Consider: the only correlate in language to an intrinsic
necessity is an arbitrary rule. It is the only thing which one can milk
out of this intrinsic necessity into a proposition.

373. Grammar tells what kind of object anything is. (theology

f j / as grammar. ) ~~

374. The great difficulty here is not to represent the matter as if
there were something one couldn't do. As if there really were an object,
from which i derive its description, but i were unable to shew it to

anyone. -and the best that i can propose is that we should yield

to the temptation to use this picture, but then investigate how the
application of the picture goes.

375. How does one teach anyone to read to himself? How does
one know if he can do so? How does he himself know that he is doing
what is required of him?

376. When i say the abc to myself, what is the criterion of my
doing the same as someone else who silently repeats it to himself?
It might be found that the same thing took place in my larynx and in
his. (and similarly when we both think of the same thing, wish the
same, and so on. ) but the n did we learn the use of the words; to

philosophical investigations i

1170

say such-and-such to oneself by someones pointing to a process in
thejarynx or the brain? Is it not also perfectly possible that my image
of the sound a and his correspond to different physiological processes?
The question is: how do we compare images?

377. Perhaps a logician will think: the same is the samehow
identity is established is a psychological question. (high is high
it is a matter of psychology that one sometimes sees , and sometimes
hears it. )

what is the criterion for the sameness of two images? What is
the criterion for the redness of an image? For me, when it is someone
elses image: what he says and does. For myself, when it is my image:
nothing. And what goes for red also goes for same.

378. Before i judge that two images which i have are the same,
i must recognize them as the same. And when that has happened,
how am i to know that the word same describes what i recognize?
Only if i can express my recognition in some other way, and if it is
possible for someone else to teach me that same is the correct word
here.

For if i need a justification for using a word, it must also be one for
someone else.

379. First i am aware of it as this ; and then i remember what it
is called. Consider: in what cases is it right to say this?

380. How do i recognize that this is red? I see that it is this;
and then i know that that is what this is called. This? What? I
what kind of answer to this question makes sense?

(you keep on steering towards the idea of the private ostensive
definition. )

i could not apply any rules to a private transition from what is seen
to words. Here the rules really- would hang in the air; for the institu
tion of their use is lacking.

381. How do i know that this colour is red? It would be an
answer to say: i have learnt english.

382. At these words i form this image. How can i justify this?

Has anyone shewn me the image of the colour blue and told me

that this is the image of blue?

What is the meaning of the words: this image? How does one
point to an image? How does one point twice to the same image?

Uge philosophical investigations i

383. We are not analysing a phenomenon (e. G. Thought) but a
concept (e. G. That of thinking), and therefore the use of a word. So
it may look as if what we were doing were nominalism. Nominalists
make the mistake of interpreting all words as names , and so of not really
describing their use, but only, so to speak, giving a paper draft on
such a description.

384. You learned the concept pain when you learned language.

385. Ask yourself: would it be imaginable for someone to learn
to do sums in his head without ever doing written or oral ones?
Learning it will mean: being made able to do it. Only the question

arises, what will count as a criterion for being able to do it? -but

is it also possible for some tribe to know only of calculation in the
head, and of no other kind? Here one has to ask oneself: what will
that be like? And so one will have to depict it as a limiting case.
And the question will then arise whether we are still willing to use
the concept of calculating in the head hereor whether in such
circumstances it has lost its purpose, because the phenomena gravitate
towards another paradigm.

386. But why have you so little confidence in yourself? Ordinarily
you always know well enough what it is to calculate/ so if you say
you have calculated in imagination, then you will have done so. If you
had not calculated, you would not have said you had. Equally, if you
say that you see something red in imagination, then it will be red.
You know what red is elsewhere. And further: you do not always
rely on the agreement of other people; for you often report that you

have seen something no one else has. -b ut i do h ave confidence in

myselfi say without hesitation that i have done this sum in m y head,
have imagined this colour. The difficulty is not that i doubt whether
i really imagined anything red. But it is this : that we should be able,
just like that, to point out or describe the colour we have imagined,
that the projection of the image into reality presents no difficulty
at all. Are they then so alike that one might mix them up? But i can
also recognize a man from a drawing straight off. Well, but can i
ask: what does a correct image of this colour look like? Or what
sort of thing is it? ; can i learn this?

(i cannot accept his testimony because it is not testimony . It only
tells me what he is inclined to say. )

387. The deep aspect of this matter readily eludes us.

Philosophical investigations i

119c

388. I dont see anything violet here, but i can shew it you if
you give me a paint box. How can one know that one can shew it
if . . . In other words, that one can recognize it if one sees it?

How do i know from my image , what the colour really looks like?

How do i know that i shall be able to do something? That is, that the
state i am in now is that of being able to do that thing?

389. The image must be more like its object than any picture.
For, however like i make the picture to what it is supposed to repre
sent, it can always be the picture of something else as well. But it is
essential to the image that it is the image of this and of nothing else.
Thus one might come to regard the image as a super-likeness.

390. Could one imagine a stones having consciousness? And if
anyone can do sowhy should that not merely prove that such image-
mongery is of no interest to us?

391. I can perhaps even imagine (though it is not easy) that each
of the people whom i see in the street is in frightful pain, but is artfully
concealing it. And it is important that i have to imagine an artful con
cealment here. That i do not simply say to myself: well, his soul is
in pain: but what has that to do with his body? Or after all it need
not shew in his body! And if i imagine thiswhat do i do; what
do i say to myself; how do i look at the people? Perhaps i look at one
and think: it must be difficult to laugh when one is in such pain,
and much else of the same kind. I as it were play a part, act as if the
others were in pain. When i do this i am said for example to be
imagining....

392. When i imagine he is in pain, all that really goes on in me
is . . . . Then someone else says: i believe i can imagine it without
thinking *. . . . (i believe i can think without words. ) this leads
to nothing. The analysis oscillates between natural science and
grammar.

393. When i imagine that someone who is laughing is really in
pain i dont imagine any pain-behaviour, for i see just the opposite.
So what do i imagine? I have already said what. And i do not

necessarily imagine my being in pain. -but then what is the process

of imagining it? -where (outside philosophy) do we use the

120 *

philosophical investigations i

words i can imagine his being in pain or i imagine that. . . .
Or imagine that. . . . ?

We say, for example, to someone who has to play a theatrical part:
here you must imagine that this man is in pain and is concealing
itand now we give him no directions, do not tell him what he
is actually to do. For this reason the suggested analysis is not to
the point either. We now watch the actor who is imagining this
situation.

394. In what sort of circumstances should we ask anyone: what
actually went on in you as you imagined this? And what sort of
answer do we expect?

395. There is a lack of clarity about the role of imaginability in our
investigation. Namely about the extent to which it ensures that a
proposition makes sense.

396. It is no more essential to the understanding of a proposition
that one should imagine anything in connexion with it, than that one
should make a sketch from it.

397. Instead of imaginability one can also say here: represent-
ability by a particular method of representation. Ajid such a repre
sentation may indeed safely point a way to further use of a sentence.
On the other hand a picture may obtrude itself upon us and be of no
use at all.

398. But when i imagine something, or even actually see objects,
i have got something which my neighbour has not. I understand
you. You want to look about you and say: at any rate only i have
got this. What are these words for? They serve no purpose.
Can one not add: there is here no question of a seeingand there
fore none of a havingnor of a subject, nor therefore of i either?
Might i not ask: in what sense have you got what you are talking about
and saying that only you have got it? Do you possess it? You do not
even see it. Must you not really say that no one has got it? And this too
is clear: if as a matter of logic you exclude other peoples having
something, it loses its sense to say that you have it.

But what is the thing you are speaking of? It is true i said that i
knew within myself what you meant. But that meant that i knew
how one thinks to conceive this object, to see it, to make ones looking
and pointing mean it. I know hew one stares ahead and looks about

philosophical investigations i

i 2i e

one in this caseand the rest. I think we can say: you are talking (if,
for example, you are sitting in a room) of the visual room. The visual
room is the one that has no owner. I can as little own it as i can walk
about it, or look at it, or point to it. Inasmuch as it cannot be any one
elses it is not mine either. In other words, it does not belong to me
because i want to use the same form of expression about it as about the
material room in which i sit. The description of the latter need not
mention an owner, in fact it need not have any owner. But then the
visual room cannot have any owner. Forone might sayit has
no master, outside or in.

Think of a picture of a landscape, an imaginary landscape with a
house in it. Someone asks whose house is that? The answer,
by the way, might be it belongs to the farmer who is sitting on the
bench in front of it. But then he cannot for example enter his house.

399. One might also say: surely the owner of the visual room
would have to be the same kind of thing as it is; but he is not to be
found in it, and there is no outside.

400. The visual room seemed like a discovery, but what its
discoverer really found was a new way of speaking, a new comparison;
it might even be called a new sensation.

401. You have a new conception and interpret it as seeing a new
object. You interpret a grammatical movement made by yourself
as a quasi-physical phenomenon which you are observing. (think for
example of the question: are sense-data the material of which the
universe is made? )

but there is an objection to my saying that you have made a gram
matical movement. What you have primarily discovered is a new way
of looking at things. As if you had invented a new way of painting;
or, again, a new metre, or a new kind of song.

402. Its true i say now i am having such-and-such an image,
but the words i am having are merely a sign to someone else; the
description of the image is a complete account of the imagined world.
You mean: the words i am having are like i sayl . . . . You are
inclined to say it should really have been expressed differently. Perhaps
simply by making a sign with ones hand and then giving a description.
-when as in this case, we disapprove of the expressions of ordinary
language (which are after all performing their office), we have got a
picture in our heads which conflicts with the picture of our ordinary

122

philosophical investigations i

way of speaking. Whereas we are tempted to say that our way of
speaking does not describe the facts as they really are. As if, for
example the proposition he has pains could be false in some other way
than by that mans not having pains. As if the form of expression
were saying something false even when the proposition faute de
mieux asserted something true.

For this is what disputes between idealists, solipsists and realists
look like. The one party attack the normal form of expression as if
they were attacking a statement; the others defend it, as if they were
stating facts recognized by every reasonable human being.

403. If i were to reserve the word pain solely for what i had
hitherto called my pain, and others l. W/s pain, i should do
other people no injustice, so long as a notation were provided in which
the loss of the word pain in other connexions were somehow
supplied. Other people would still be pitied, treated by doctors and
so on. It would, of course, be no objection to this mode of expression
to say: but look here, other people have just the same as youl

but what should i gain from this new kind of account? Nothing.
But after all neither does the solipsist want any practical advantage
when he advances his view i

404. When i say t am in pain, i do not point to a person who is
in pain, since in a certain sense i have no idea who is. And this can be
given a justification. For the main point is: i did not say that such-and-

such a person was in pain, but i am. Now in saying this i

dont name any person. Just as i dont name anyone when i groan
with pain. Though someone else sees who is in pain from the
groaning.

What does it mean to know who is in pain? It means, for example,
to know which man in this room is in pain: for instance, that it is the
one who is sitting over there, or the one who is standing in that comer,
the tall one over there with the fair hair, and so on. What am i
getting at? At the fact that there is a great variety of criteria for
personal  identity \

now which of them determines my saying that t am in pain?
None.

405. But at any rate when you say t am in pain, you want to
draw the attention of others to a particular person. The answer
might be: no, i want to draw their attention to myself

philosophical investigations i nje

406. But surely what you want to do with the words i am.

Is to distinguish between yourself and other people. Can this be said
in every case? Even when i merely groan? And even if i do want
to distinguish" between myself and other peopledo i want to dis
tinguish between the person l. W. And the person n. N. ?

407. It would be possible to imagine someone groaning out:
someone is in paini dont know who! And our then hurrying
to help him, the one who groaned.

408. But you arent in doubt whether it is you or someone else
who has the pain! The proposition i dont know whether i
or someone else is in pain would be a logical product, and one of its
factors would be: i dont know whether i am in pain or not
and that is not a significant proposition.

409. Imagine several people standing in a ring, and me among them.
One of us, sometimes this one, sometimes that, is connected to the
poles of an electrical machine without our being able to see this. I
observe the faces of the others and try to see which of us has just been
electrified. Then i say: now i know who it is; for its myself.
In this sense i could also say: now i know who is getting the shocks;
it is myself. This would be a rather queer way of speaking. But if i
make the supposition that i can feel the shock even when someone
else is electrified, then the expression now i know who . . . .
Becomes quite unsuitable. It does not belong to this game.

410. I is not the name of a person, nor here of a place, and
this is not a name. But they are connected with names. Names are
explained by means of them. It is also true that it is characteristic of
physics not to use these words.

411. Consider how the following questions can be applied, and
how settled:

(1) are these books my books?

(2) is this foot my foot?

(3) is this body my body?

(4) is this sensation my sensation?

Each of these questions has practical (non-philosophical) applications.

(2) think of cases in which my foot is anaesthetized or paralysed.
Under certain circumstances the question could be settled by deter
mining whether i can feel pain in this foot.

I24 e philosophical investigations i

(j) here one might be pointing to a mirror-image. Under certain
circumstances, however, one might touch a body arid ask the question.
In others it means the same as: does my body look like thafi

(4) which sensation does one mean by * this  one? That is: how is
one using the demonstrative pronoun here? Certainly otherwise than
in, say, the first example! Here confusion occurs because one imagines
that by directing ones attention to a sensation one is pointing to it.

4x2. The feeling of an unbridgeable gulf between consciousness
\and brain-process: how does it come about that this does not come
into the considerations of our ordinary life? This idea of a difference in
lrind is accompanied by slight giddiness, which occurs when we are
performing a piece of logical sleight-of-hand. (the same giddiness
attacks us when we think of certain theorems in set theory. ) when does
this feelin g occur in the present case? It is when i, for example, turn
my attenti on in a particular way on to my own consciousness, and,
astonished, say to myself: this is supposed to be produced by a
process in the brain! As it were clutching my forehead. But wha t
can it mean to speak of turning my attention on to my own con scious
ne ss ? ~this~is surely the queerest thing there, could be! It was a
particular act of gazing that i called doing this. I stared fixedly in
front of mebut not at any particular point or object. My eyes were
wide open, the brows not contracted (as they mostly are when i am
interested in a particular object). No such interest preceded this gazing.
My glance was vacant; or again like that of someone admiring the
illumination of the sky and drinking in the light.

Now bear in mind that the proposition which i uttered as a paradox
(this is produced by a brain-process! ) has nothing paradoxical
about it. I could have said it in the course of an experiment whose
purpose was to shew that an effect of light which i see is produced by
stimulation of a particular part of the brain. But i did not utter the
sentence in the surroundings in which it would have had an everyday
and unparadoxical sense. And my attention was not such as would
have accorded with making an experiment. (if it had been, my look
would have been intent, not vacant. )

413. Here we have a case of introspection, not unlike that from
which w illiam james got the idea that the self consisted mainly of
peculiar motions in the head and between the head and throat.

Philosophical investigations i 125c

and james introspection shewed, not the meaning of the word self
(so far as it means something like person, human being, he him
self, i myself), nor any analysis of such a thing, but the state of a
philosophers attention when he says the word self to himself and
tries to analyse its meaning. (and a good deal could be learned from
this. )

414. You think that after all you must be weaving a piece of cloth:
because you are sitting at a loomeven if it is emptyand going
through the motions of weaving.

415. What we are supplying are really remarks on the natural
history of human beings; we are not contributing curiosities however,
but observations which no one has doubted, but which have escaped
remark only because they are always before our eyes.

416. Human beings agree in saying that they see, hear, feel, and
so on (even though some are blind and some are deaf). So they are
their own witnesses that they have consciousness . But how strange
this isl whom do i really inform, if i say i have consciousness?
What is the purpose of saying this to myself, and how can another
person understand me? Now, expressions like i see, i hear,
i am conscious really have their uses. I tell a doctor now i am
hearing with this ear again, or i tell someone who believes i am in a
faint i am conscious again, and so on.

417. Do i obserye^n yself , then, and perceive that i am seeing or
conscious? And why talk about observation at all? Why not simply
say i perceive i am conscious? But what are the words i perceive
for here? Why not say i am conscious? But dont the words i
perceive here shew that i am attending to my consciousness? Which
is ordinarily not the case. If so, then the sentence i perceive i am
conscious does not say that i am conscious, but that my attention is
disposed in such-and-such a way.

But isnt it a particular experience that occasions my saying i am
conscious again ? What experience? In what situations do we say it?

418. Is my having consciousness a fact of experience?

But doesnt one say that a man has consciousness, and that a tree
or a stone does not? What would it be like if it were otherwise?
Would human beings all be unconscious? No; not in the ordinary
sense of the word. But i, for instance, should not have con
sciousness-as i now in fact have it.

I 2 6  philosophical investigations i

419. In what circumstances shall i say that a tribe has a chief ?
And the chief must surely have consciousness. Surely we cant have a
chief without consciousness!

420. But cant i imagine that the people around me are automata,
la ck consciousness, even though they behave in the same way as
usual? If i imagine it nowalone in my roomi see people with
fixed looks (as in a trance) going about their businessthe idea is
perhaps a little uncanny. But just try to keep hold of this idea in the
midst of your ordinary intercourse with others, in the street, sayl
say to yourself, for example: the children over there are mere
automata; all their liveliness is mere automatism. And you will either
find these words becoming quite meaningless; or you will produce
in yourself some kind of uncanny feeling, or something of the sort.

Seeing a living human being as an automaton is analogous to seeing
one figure as a limiting case or variant of another; the cross-pieces of a
window as a swastika, for example.

421. It seems paradoxical to us that we should make such a medley,
mi-ring physical states and states of consciousness up together in a
single report: he suffered great torments and tossed about restlessly.
It is quite usual; so why do we find it paradoxical? Because we want
to say that the sentence deals with both tangibles and intangibles at
once. But does it worry you if i say: these three struts give the

building stability? Are three and stability tangible? -l ook a t the

sentence as an instrument, and at its sense as its employment.

422. What am i believing in when i believe that men have souls?
What am i believing in, when i believe that this substance contains
two carbon rings? In both cases there is a picture in the foreground,
but the sense lies far in the background; that is, the application of the
picture is not easy to survey.

423. Certainly all these things happen in you. And now all i ask
is to understand the expression we use. The picture is there. And i
am not disputing its validity in any particular case. Only i also want
to understand the application of the picture.

424. The picture is there-, and i do not dispute its correctness. But
what is its application? Think of the picture of blindness as a darkness
in the soul or in the head of the blind man.

425. In numberless cases we exert ourselves to find a picture and
once it is found the application as it were comes about of itself. In

philosophical investigations i i2 7 e

this case we already have a picture which forces itself on us at every
turn, but does not help us out of the difficulty, which only begins
here.

If i ask, for example: how am i to imagine this mechanism going
into this box? Perhaps a drawing reduced in scale may serve to
answer me. Then i can be told: you see, it goes in like this 97 ; or
perhaps even: why are you surprised? See how it goes here; it is the
same there. Of course the latter does not explain anything more: it
simply invites me to apply the picture i am given.

426. A picture is conjured up which seems to fix the sense un
ambiguously. The actual use, compared with that suggested by the
picture, seems like something muddied. Here again we get the same
thing as in set theory: the form of expression we use seems to have been
designe d for ajgod, who knows what we cannot know; he sees the whole
of each of those infinite series and he sees into human consciousness.
For us, of course, these forms of expression are like pontificals which
we may put on, but cannot do much with, since we lack the effective
p owe r that would give these vestments meaning and purpose.

In the actual use of expressions we make detours, we go by side-
roads. We see the straight highway before us, but of course we
cannot use it, because it is permanently closed.

427. While i was speaking to him i did not know what was going
on in his head. In saying this, one is not thinking of brain-processes,
but of thought-processes. The picture should be taken seriously.
We should really like to see into his head. And yet we only mean what
elsewhere we should mean by saying: we should like to know what he
is thinking. I want to say: we have this vivid pictureand that use,
apparently contradicting the picture, which expresses the psychical.

428. This queer thing, thoughtbut it does not strike us as
queer when we are thinking. Thought does not strike us as mysterious
while we are thinking, but only when we say, as it were retrospectively:
how was that possible? How was it possible for thought to deal
with the very object itself ? We feel as if by means of it we had caught
reality in our net.

429. The agreement, the harmony, of thought and reality consists
in this: if i say falsely that something is red, then, for all that, it isnt red.

Philosophical investigations i

i 28 e

and when i want to explain the word red to someone, in the sen
tence that is not red, i do it by pointing to something red.

430. Put a ruler against this body; it does not say that the body is
of such-and-such a length. Rather is it in itselfi should like to say
dead, and achieves nothing of what thought achieves. It is as if
we had imagined that the essential thing about a living man was the
outward form. Then we made a lump of wood in that form, and were
abashed to see the stupid block, which hadnt even any similarity to a
living being.

431. There is a gulf between an order and its execution. It
has to be filled by the act of understanding.

Only in the act of understanding is it meant that we are to do
this. The order -why, that is nothing but sounds, ink-marks.

432. Every sign by itself seems dead. What gives it life? In use
it is alive . Is life breathed into it there? Or is the use its life?

433. When we give an order, it can look as if the ultimate thing
sought by the order had to remain unexpressed, as there is always a
gulf between an order and its execution. Say i want someone to make
a particular movement, say to raise his arm. To make it quite clear, i
do the movement. This picture seems unambiguous till we ask: how
does he know that he is to make that movement ? How does he know at all
what use he is to make of the signs i give him, whatever they are?
Perhaps i shall now try to supplement the order by means of further
signs, by pointing from myself to him, making encouraging gestures,
etc.. Here it looks as if the order were beginning to stammer.

As if the signs were precariously trying to produce understanding in
us. But if we now understand them, by what token do we under
stand?

434. The gesturewe should like to say tries to portray, but
cannot do it.

435. If it is asked: how do sentences manage to represent? The
answer might be: dont you know? You certainly see it, when you
use them. For nothing is concealed.

How do sentences do it? Dont you know? For nothing is hidden.

But given this answer: but you know how sentences do it, for
nothing is concealed one would like to retort yes, but it all goes by
so quick, and i should like to see it as it were laid open to view.

Philosophical investigations i

129c

436. Here it is easy to get into that dead-end in philosophy, where
one: believes that the difficulty of the task consists in our having to
describe phenomena that are hard to get hold of, the present experience
that slips quickly by, or something of the kind. Where we find ordinary
language too crude, and it looks as if we were having to do, not with
the phenomena of every-day, but with ones that easily elude us, and,
in their coming to be and passing away, produce those others as an
average effect. (augustine: manifestissima et usitatissima sunt, et
eadem rusus nimis latent, et nova est inventio eorum. )

437. A wish seems already to know what will or would satisfy it;
a proposition, a thought, what makes it trueeven when that thing
is not there at all! Whence this determining of what is not yet there?
This despotic demand? (the hardness of the logical must. )

438. A plan as such is something unsatisfied. (like a wish,
an expectation, a suspicion, and so on. )

by this i mean: expectation is unsatisfied, because it is the expectation
of something; belief, opinion, is unsatisfied, because it is the opinion
that something is the case, something real, something outside the
process of believing.

439. In what sense can one call wishes, expectations, beliefs, etc.
Unsatisfied? What is our prototype of nonsatisfaction? Is it a
hollow space? And would one call that unsatisfied? Wouldnt this
be a metaphor too? Isnt what we call nonsatisfaction a feelingsay
hunger?

In a particular system of expressions we can describe an object by
means of the words satisfied and unsatisfied. For example, if
we lay it down that we call a hollow cylinder an unsatisfied cylinder
and the solid cylinder that fills it its satisfaction.

440. Saying i should like an apple does not mean: i believe an
apple will quell my feeling of nonsatisfaction. This proposition is
not an expression of a wish but of nonsatisfaction.

441. By nature and by a particular training, a particular education,
we are disposed to give spontaneous expression to wishes in certain
circumstances. (a wish is, of course, not such a circumstance. ) in
this game the question whether i know what i wish before my wish is

philosophical investigations i

130

fulfilled cannot arise at all. And the fact that some event stops my wish
ing does not mean that it fulfills it. Perhaps i should not have been
satisfied if my wish had been satisfied.

On the other hand the word wish is also used in this way: i
don't know myself what i wish for. (for wishes themselves are a
veil between us and the thing wished for. )

suppose it were asked do i know what i long for before i get it?
If i have learned to talk, then i do know.

442. I see someone pointing a gun and say i expect a report.
The shot is fired. Well, that was what you expected; so did that
report somehow already exist in your expectation? Or is it just that
there is some other kind of agreement between your expectation and
what occurred; that that noise was not contained in your expectation,
and merely accidentally supervened when the expectation was being
fulfilled? But no, if the noise had not occurred, my expectation would
not have been fulfilled; the noise fulfilled it; it was not an accompani
ment of the fulfilment like a second guest accompanying the one i
expected. Was the thing about the event that was not in the expecta
tion too an accident, an extra provided by fate? But then what was
not an extra? Did something of the shot already occur in my expecta
tion? Then what was extra? For wasnt i expecting the whole shot?

The report was not so loud as i had expected. Then was there
a louder bang in your expectation?

443. The red which you imagine is surely not the same (not the
same thing) as the red which you see in front of you; so how can you
say that it is what you imagined? But havent we an analogous case
with the propositions here is a red patch and here there isn't a
red patch? The word red occurs in both; so this word cannot
indicate the presence of something red.

444. One may have the feeling that in the sentence i expect he is
coming one is using the words he is coming in a different sense
from the one they have in the assertion he is coming. But if it were
so how could i say that my expectation had been fulfilled? If i wanted
to explain the words he and is coming, say by means of ostensive
definitions, the same definitions of these words would go for both
sentences.

But it might now be asked: whats it like for him to come? -the
door opens, someone walks in, and so on. What's it like for me to

philosophical investigations i i 3 ie

expect him to come? I walk up and down the room, look at the
clock now and then, and so on. But the one set of events has not
the smallest similarity to the other 1 so how can one use the same
words in describing them? But perhaps i say as i walk up and down:
i expect hell come innow there is a similarity somewhere. But
of what kind? !

445. It is in language that an expectation and its fulfilment make
contact.

446. It would be odd to say: a process looks different when it
happens from when it doesnt happen. Or a red patch looks
different when it is there from when it isnt therebut language
abstracts from this difference, for it speaks of a red patch whether it
is there or not.

447. The feeling is as if the negation of a proposition had to make
it true in a certain sense, in order to negate it.

(the assertion of the negative proposition contains the proposition
which is negated, but not the assertion of it. )

448. If i say i did not dream last night, still i must know where
to look for a dream; that is, the proposition i dreamt, applied to
this actual situation, may be false, but mustnt be senseless. Does
that mean, then, that you did after all feel something, as it were the
hint of a dream, which made you aware of the place which a dream
would have occupied?

Again: if i say i have no pain in my arm, does that mean that i
have a shadow of the sensation of pain, which as it were indicates the
place where the pain might be?

In what sense does my present painless state contain the possibility
of pain?

If anyone says: for the word pain to have a meaning it is necessary
that pain should be recognized as such when it occursone can reply:
it is not more necessary than that the absence of pain should be
recognized.

449. But mustnt i know what it would be like if i were in pain?
We fail to get away from the idea that using a sentence involves
imagining something for every word.

We do not realize that we calculate , operate, with words, and in the
course of time translate them sometimes into one picture, sometimes
into another. It is as if one were to believe that a written order for a

philosophical investigations i

132

cow which someone is to hand over to me always had to be accompanied
by an image of a cow, if the order was not to lose its meaning.

450. Knowing what someone looks like: being able to call up an
imagebut also: being able to mimic his expression. Need one imagine
it in order to mimic it? And isnt mimicking it just as good as imagin
ing it?

451. Suppose i give someone the order imagine a red circle here

and now i say: understanding the order means knowing what it is
like for it to have been carried outor even: being able to imagine
what it is like. ?

452. I want to say: if someone could see the mental process of
expectation, he would necessarily be seeing what was being expected.
But that is the case: if you see the expression of an expectation, you
see what is being expected. And in what other way, in what other sense
would it be possible to see it?

453. Anyone who perceived my expectation would necessarily
have a direct perception of what was being expected. That is to say, he
would not have to infer it from the process he perceived 1 but to say
that someone perceives an expectation makes no sense . Unless indeed
it means, for example, that he perceives the expression of an expecta
tion. To say of an expectant person that he perceives his expectation
instead of saying that he expects, would be an idiotic distortion of the
expression.

454. Everything is already there in . . . . How does it come

about that this arrow points ? Doesnt it seem to

carry in it something besides itself? No, not the dead line on paper;
only the psychical thing, the meaning, can do that. That is both
true and false. The arrow points only in the application that a living
being makes of it.

This pointing is not a hocus-pocus which can be performed only by
the soul.

455. We want to say: when we mean something, its like going
up to someone, its not having a dead picture (of any kind). We go
up to the thing we mean.

456. When one means something, it is oneself meaning; so one is
oneself in motion. One is rushing ahead and so cannot also observe
oneself rushing ahead. Indeed not.

Philosophical investigations i 133a

457. Yes: meaning something is like going up to someone.

458. An order orders its own execution. So it knows its execu
tion, then, even before it is there? But that was a grammatical
proposition and it means: if an order runs do such-and-such then
executing the order is called doing such-and-such.

459. We say the order orders this  and do it; but also the
order orders this: i am to . . . . We translate it at one time into a
proposition, at another into a demonstration, and at another into
action.

460. Could the justification of an action as fulfilment of an order
run like this: you said bring me a yellow flower, upon which this
one gave me a feeling of satisfaction; that is why i have brought it?
Wouldnt one have to reply: but i didnt set you to bring me the
flower which should give you that sort of feeling after what i saidl?

461. In what sense does an order anticipate its execution? By
ordering just that which later on is carried out? But one would have
to say which later on is carried out, or again is not carried out.
And that is to say nothing.

But even if my wish does not determine what is going to be the
case, still it does so to speak determine the theme of a fact, whether
the fact fulfils the wish or not. We areas it weresurprised, not
at anyones knowing the future, but at his being able to prophesy at
all (right or wrong).

As if the mere prophecy, no matter whether true or false, fore
shadowed the future; whereas it knows nothing of the future and
cannot know less than nothing.

462. I can look for him when he is not there, but not hang him
when he is not there.

One might want to say: but he must be somewhere there if i am
looking for him. Then he must be somewhere there too if i dont
find him and even if he doesnt exist at all.

463. You were looking for him ? You cant even have known if
he was there! But this problem really does arise when one looks
for something in mathematics. One can- ask, for example, how was it
possible so much as to look for the trisection of the angle?

464. My aim is: to teach you to pass from a piece of disguised
nonsense to something that is patent nonsense.

I 34 e philosophical investigations i

465. An expectation is so made that whatever happens has to
accord with it, or not.

Suppose you now ask: then are facts defined one way or the other
by an expectationthat is, is it defined for whatever event may occur
whether it fulfils the expectation or not? The answer has to be: yes,
unless the expression of the expectation is indefinite; for example,
contains a disjunction of different possibilities.

466. What does man think for? What use is it? Why does he
make boilers according to calculations and not leave the thickness of
their walls to chance? After all it is only a fact of experience that
boilers do not explode so often if made according to these calculations.
But just as having once been burnt he would do anything rather than
put his hand into a fire, so he would do anything rather than not
calculate for a boiler. But as we are not interested in causes, we
shall say: human beings do in fact think: this, for instance, is how they
proceed when they make a boiler. Now, can't a boiler produced in
this way explode? Oh, yes.

467. Does man think, then, because he has found that thinking
pays? Because he thinks it advantageous to think?

(does he bring his children up because he has found it pays? )

468. What would shew why he thinks?

469. And yet one can say that thinking has been found to pay.
That there are fewer boiler explosions than formerly, now that we
no longer go by feeling in deciding the thickness of the walls, but
make such-and-such calculations instead. Or since each calculation
done by one engineer got checked by a second one.

470. So we do sometimes think because it has been found to pay.

471. It often happens that we only become aware of the important
facts , if we suppress the question why? ; and then in the course of
our investigations these facts lead us to an answer.

472. The character of the belief in the uniformity of nature can
perhaps be seen most clearly in the case in which we fear what we
expect. Nothing could induce me to put my hand into a flame
although after all it is only in the past that i have burnt myself.

473. The belief that fire will burn me is of the same kind as the
fear that it will burn me.

Philosophical investigations

x 35 e

474. I shall get burnt if i put my hand in the fire: that is certainty.

That is to say: here we see the meaning of certainty. (what it amounts

to, not just the meaning of the word certainty. )

475. On being asked for the grounds of a supposition, one be -
thinks oneself of them. Does the same thing happen here as when one
considers what may have been the causes of an event?

476. We should distinguish between the object of fear and the
cause of fear.

Thus a face which inspires fear or delight (the object of fear or
delight), is not on that account its cause, butone might sayits
target.

477. Why do you believe that you will burn yourself on the
hot-plate? Have you reasons for this belief; and do you need
reasons?

478. What kind of reason have i to assume that my finger will
feel a resistance when it touches the table? What kind of reason to
believe that it will hurt if this pencil pierces my hand? When i ask
this, a hundred reasons present themselves, each drowning the voice
of the others. But i have experienced it myself innumerable times,
and as often heard of similar experiences; if it were not so, it would

479. The question: on what grounds do you believe this? Might
mean: from what you are now deducing it (have you just deduced
it)? But it might also mean: what grounds can you produce for
this assumption on thinking it over?

480. Thus one could in fact take grounds for an opinion to
mean only what a man had said to himself before he arrived at the
opinion. The calculation that he has actually carried out. If it is
now asked: but how can previous experience be a ground for
assuming that such-and-such will occur later on? The answer is:
what general concept have we of grounds for this kind of assumption?
This sort of statement about the past is simply what we call a ground
for assuming that this will happen in the future. And if you are
surprised at our playing such a game i refer you to the effect of a past
experience (to the fact that a burnt child fears the fire).

Philosophical investigations i

136

481. If anyone said that information about the past could not
convince him that something would happen in the future, i should not
understand him. One might ask him: what do you expect to be told,
then? What sort of information do you call a ground for such a belief?
What do you call conviction? In what kind of way do you expect
to be convinced? If these are not grounds, then what are grounds?
If you say these are not grounds, then you must surely be able to state
what must be the case for us to have the right to say that there are
grounds for our assumption.

For note: here grounds are not propositions which logically imply
what is believed.

Not that one can say: less is needed for belief than for knowledge.
For the question here is not one of an approximation to logical
inference.

482. We are misled by this way of putting it: this is a good
ground, for it makes the occurrence of the event probable. That is
as if we had asserted something further about the ground, which
justified it as a ground; whereas to say that this ground makes the
occurrence probable is to say nothing except that this ground comes up
to a particular standard of good groundsbut the standard has no
grounds!

483. A good ground is one that looks like this .

484. One would like to say: it is a good ground only because it
makes the occurrence really probable. Because it, so to speak, really
has an influence on the event; as it were an experiential one.

485. Justification by experience comes to an end. If it did not it
would not be justification.

486. Does it follow from the sense-impressions which i get that
there is a chair over there? How can a proposition follow from sense-
impressions? Well, does it follow from the propositions which describe
the sense-impressions? No. But don't i infer that a chair is there
from impressions, from sense-data? I make no inference 1and yet i
sometimes do. I see a photograph for example, and say there must
have been a chair over there or again from what i can see here i infer
that there is a chair over there. That is an inference; but not one
belonging to logic. An inference is a transition to an assertion; and so
also to the behaviour that corresponds to the assertion. T draw the
consequences' not only in words, but also in action.

Philosophical investigations i i 37 e

was i justified in drawing these consequences? What is called a
justification here? How is the word justification used? Describe
language-games. From these you will also be able to see the importance
of being justified.

487. I am leaving the room because you tell me to.

I am leaving the room, but not because you tell me to.

Does this proposition describe a connexion between my action and his
order; or does it make the connexion?

Can one ask: how do you know that you do it because of this, or
not because of this? And is the answer perhaps: i feel it?

488. How do i judge whether it is so? By circumstantial evidence?

489. Ask yourself: on what occasion, for what purpose, do we say
this?

What kind of actions accompany these words? (think of a greeting. )
in what scenes will they be used; and what for? 

490. How do i know that this line of thought has led me to this

action? Well, it is a particular picture: for example, of a calculation
leading to a further experiment in an experimental investigation. It
looks like this -and now i could describe an example.

491. Not: without language we could not communicate with
one anotherbut for sure: without language we cannot influence
other people in such-and-such ways; cannot build roads and machines,
etc.. And also: without the use of speech and writing people could
not communicate.

492. To invent a language could mean to invent an instrument for
a particular purpose on the basis of the laws of nature (or consistently
with them); but it also has the other sense, analogous to that in which
we speak of the invention of a game.

Here i am stating something about the grammar of the word
language, by connecting it with the grammar of the word invent.

493. We say: the cock calls the hens by crowingbut doesnt a
comparison with. , our language lie at the bottom of this? Isnt the
aspect quite altered if we imagine the crowing to set the hens in
motion by some kind of physical causation?

But if it were shewn how the words come to me act on the person
addressed, so that finally, given certain conditions, the muscles of his

philosophical investigations i

138*

legs are innervated, and so onshould we feel that that sentence lost
the character of a sentence ?

494. I want to say: it is primarily the apparatus of our ordinary
language, of our word-language, that we call language; and then other
things by analogy or comparability with this.

495. Clearly, i can establish by experience that a human being (or
animal) reacts to one sign as i want him to, and to another not. That,

e. G. , a human being goes to the right at the sign  - > 99 and

goes to the left at the sign  < - ; but that he does not react

to the sign  0-1 , as to  < - .

I do not even need to fabricate a case, i only have to consider
what is in fact the case; namely, that i can direct a man who has learned
only german, only by using the german language. (for here i am
looking at learning german as adjusting a mechanism to respond to a
certain kind of influence; and it may be all one to us whether someone
else has learned the language, or was perhaps from birth constituted to
react to sentences in german like a normal person who has learned
german. )

496. Grammar does not tell us how language must be constructed
in order to fulfil its purpose, in order to have such-and-such an effect
on human beings. It only describes and in no way explains the use of
signs.

497. The rules of grammar may be called arbitrary, if that is to
mean that the aim of the grammar is nothing but that of the language.

If someone says if our language had not this grammar, it could not
express these factsit should be asked what  could 99 means here.

498. When i say that the orders bring me sugar and bring me
milk make sense, but not the combination milk me sugar, that does
not mean that the utterance of this combination of words has no effect.
And if its effect is that the other person stares at me and gapes, i dont
on that account call it the order to stare and gape, even if that was
precisely the effect that i wanted to produce.

499. To say this combination of words makes no sense excludes
it from the sphere of language and thereby bounds the domain of
language. But when one draws a boundary it may be for various
kinds of reason. If i surround an area with a fence or a line or other
wise, the purpose may be to prevent someone from getting in or out;

philosophical investigations i

i39 e

but it may also be part of a game and the players be supposed, say, to
jump over the boundary; or it may shew where the property of one
man ends and that of another begins; and so on. So if i draw a boun
dary line that is not yet to say what i am drawing it for.

500. When a sentence is called senseless, it is not as it were its
sense that is senseless. But a combination of words is being excluded
from the language, withdrawn from circulation.

501. The purpose of language is to express thoughts. So
presumably the purpose of every sentence is to express a thought.
Then what thought is expressed, for example, by the sentence its
raining?

502. Asking what the sense is. Compare:

this sentence makes sense. -what sense?

This set of words is a sentence. What sentence?

5 03. If i give anyone an order i feel it to be quite enough to give him
signs. And i should never say: this is only words, and i have got to get
behind the words. Equally, when i have asked someone something
and he gives me an answer (i. E. A sign) i am contentthat was wh&t i
expectedand i dont raise the objection: but thats a mere answer.

504. But if you say: how am i to know what he means, when
i see nothing but the signs he gives? Then i say: how is he to know
what he means, when he has nothing but the signs either?

505. Must i understand an order before i can act on it? Certainly,
otherwise you wouldnt know what you had to do 1 but isnt there in
turn a jump from knowing to doing?

506. The absent-minded man who at the order right turn!
Turns left, and then, clutching his forehead, says oh! Right turn and
does a right turn. What has struck him? An interpretation?

507. I am not merely saying this, i mean something by it.
When we consider what is going on in us when we mean (and dont
merely say) words, it seems to us as if there were something coupled
to these words, which otherwise would run idle. As if they, so to
speak, connected with something in us.

508. I say the sentence: the weather is fine; but the words are
after all arbitrary signsso lets put a b c d in their place. But now
when i read this, i cant connect it straight away with the above sense.

, 40 e philosophical investigations i

i am not used, i might say, to saying a instead of the, b instead
of weather, etc.. But i dont mean by that that i am not used to
making an immediate association between the word the and a,
but that i am not used to using a in the place of theand therefore
in the sense of the. (i have not mastered this language. )

(i am not used to measuring temperatures on the fahrenheit scale.
Hence such a measure of temperature 'says nothing to me. )

509. Suppose we asked someone in what sense are these words a
description of what you are seeing? And he answers: i mean this
by these words. (say he was looking at a landscape. ) why is this
answer i mean this . . . . No answer at all?

How does one use words to mean what one sees before one?

Suppose i said a b c d and meant: the weather is fine. For as i
uttered these signs i had the experience normally had only by someone
who had year-in year-out used a in the sense of the, b in the
sense of weather, and so on. Does a b c d now mean: the weather
is fine?

What is supposed to be the criterion for my having had that ex
perience?

510. Make the following experiment: say its cold here and mean
its warm here. Can you do it? And what are you doing as you do
it? And is there only one way of doing it?

511. What does discovering that an expression doesnt make
sense mean? And what does it mean to say: if i mean something by
it, surely it must make sense? If i mean something by it? If i
mean what by it? ! One wants to say: a significant sentence is one
which one can not merely say, but also think.

512. It looks as if we could say: word-language allows of sense
less combinations of words, but the language of imagining does not
allow us to imagine anything senseless. Hence, too, the language of
drawing doesnt allow of senseless drawings? Suppose they were
drawings from which bodies were supposed to be modelled. In this
case some drawings make sense, some not. What if i imagine senseless
combinations of words?

Jij. Consider the following form of expression: the number of
pages in my book is equal to a root of the equation x 8 + 2x  3 = o.
Or: i have n friends and n 8 + 2n + 2 = o. Does this sentence
malrp sense? This cannot be seen immediately. This example shews

philosophical investigations i

i4i e

how it is that something can look like a sentence which we understand,
and yet yield no sense.

(this throws light on the concepts understanding" and meaning". )

j 14. A philosopher says that he understands the sentence i am
here"", that he means something by it, thinks somethingeven when
he doesnt think at all how, on what occasions, this sentence is used.
And if i say a rose is red in the dark too" you positively see this red
in the dark before you.

515. Two pictures of a rose in the dark. One is quite black; for
the rose is invisible. In the other, it is painted in full detail and sur
rounded by black. Is one of them right, the other wrong? Dont we
talk of a white rose in the dark and of a red rose in the dark? And
dont we say for all that that they cant be distinguished in the dark?

516. It seems clear that we understand the meaning of the question:
does the sequence 7777 occur in the development of tt ? It is
an english sentence; it can be shewn what it means for 415 to occur
in the development of tt ; and similar things. Well, our understanding
of that question reaches just so far, one may say, as such explanations
reach.

517. The question arises: cant we be mistaken in thinking that
we understand a question?

For many mathematical proofs do lead us to say that we cannot
imagine something which we believed we could imagine. (e. G. , the
construction of the heptagon. ) they lead us to revise what counts as
the domain of the imaginable.

518. Socrates to theaetetus: and if someone thinks mustnt he
think something th: yes, he must. Soc. : and if he thinks
something, mustnt it be something real? Th. : apparently. *

and mustnt someone who is painting be painting somethingand
someone who is painting something be painting something reall
well, tell me what the object of painting is: the picture of a man (e. G. ),
or the man that the picture portrays?

519. One wants to say that an order is a picture of the action
which was carried out on the order; but also that it is a picture of the
action which is to be carried out on the order.

520. If a proposition too is conceived as a picture of a possible
state of affairs and is said to shew the possibility of the state of affairs.

Philosophical investigations i

142c

still the most that the proposition can do is what a painting or relief
or film does: and so it can at any rate not set forth what is
not the case. So does it depend wholly on our grammar what will be
called (logically) possible and what not, i. E. What that grammar
permits? But surely that is arbitrary! Is it arbitrary? It is not
every sentence-like formation that we know how to do something with,
not every technique has an application in our life; and when we are
tempted in philosophy to count some quite useless thing as a proposi
tion, that is often because we have not considered its application
sufficiently.

521. Compare logically possible 5 with chemically possible 5 . One
might perhaps call a combination chemically possible if a formula
with the right valencies existed (e. G. H-o-o-o - h). Of course
such a combination need not exist; but even the formula ho a cannot
have less than no combination corresponding to it in reality.

522. If we compare a proposition to a picture, we must think
whether we are comparing it to a portrait (a historical representation)
or to a genre-picture. And both comparisons have point.

When i look at a genre-picture, it tells 5 me something, even though
i don 5 t believe (imagine) for a moment that the people i see in it really
exist, or that there have really been people in that situation. But
suppose i ask:  what does it tell me, then? 55

523. I should like to say what the picture tells me is itself. 55
that is, its telling me something consists in its own structure, in its
own lines and colours. (what would it mean to say what this musical
theme tells me is itself 55 ? )

5 24. Don 5 t take it as a matter of course, but as a remarkable fact,
that pictures and fictitious narratives give us pleasure, occupy our
minds.

(dont take it as a matter of course 55 means: find it surprising,
as you do some things which disturb you. Then the puzzling aspect
of the latter will disappear, by your accepting this fact as you do the
other. )

((the transition from patent nonsense to something which is dis
guised nonsense. ))

525. After he had said this, he left her as he did the day before. 55 
do i understand this sentence? Do i understand it just as i should
if i heard it in the course of a narrative? If it were set down in isolation

philosophical investigations i

1430

i should say, i dont know what its about. But all the same i should
know how this sentence might perhaps be used; i could myself invent
a context for it.

(a multitude of familiar paths lead off from these words in every
direction. )

526. What does it mean to understand a picture, a drawing?
Here too there is understanding and failure to understand. And here
too these expressions may mean various kinds of thing. A picture is
perhaps a still-life; but i dont understand one part of it: i cannot
see solid objects there, but only patches of colour on the canvas.
Or i see everything as solid but there are objects that i am not
acquainted with (they look like implements, but i dont know their
use). Perhaps, however, i am acquainted with the objects, but
in another sense do not understand the way they are arranged.

5 27. Understanding a sentence is much more akin to understanding
a theme in music than one may think. What i mean is that understand
ing a sentence lies nearer than one thinks to what is ordinarily called
understanding a musical theme. Why is just this the pattern of variation
in loudness and tempo? One would like to say because i know
what its all about. But what is it all about? I should not be able to
say. In order to explain i could only compare it with something else
which has the same rhythm (i mean the same pattern). (one says
dont you see, this is as if a conclusion were being drawn or this
is as it were a parenthesis, etc. How does one justify such com
parisons? There are very different kinds of justification here. )

528. It would be possible to imagine people who had something
not quite unlike a language: a play of sounds, without vocabulary or
grammar. (speaking with tongues. )

529. But what would the meaning of the sounds be in such
a case? What is it in music? Though i dont at all wish to say
that this language of a play of sounds would have to be compared
to music.

5 30. There might also be a language in whose use the soul of the
words played no part. In which, for example, we had no objection to
replacing one word by another arbitrary one of our own invention.

531. We speak of understanding a sentence in the sense in which it
can be replaced by another which says the same; but also in the sense

philosophical investigations i

i 44 e

in which it cannot be replaced by any other. (any more than one
musical theme can be replaced by another. )

in the one case the thought in the sentence is something common
to different sentences; in the other, something that is expressed only
by these words in these positions. (understanding a poem. )

532. Then has understanding two different meanings here? I
would rather say that these kinds of use of understanding make up
its meaning, make up my concept of understanding.

For i want to apply the word understanding to all this.

533. But in the second case how can one explain the expression,
transmit ones comprehension? Ask yourself: how does one lead
anyone to comprehension of a poem or of a theme? The answer to
this tells us how meaning is explained here.

534. Hearing a word in a particular sense. How queer that there
should be such a thing!

Phrased like this , emphasized like this, heard in this way, this sentence
is the first of a series in which a transition is made to these sentences,
pictures, actions.

((a multitude of familiar paths lead off from these words in every
direction. ))

535. What happens when we learn to feel the ending of a church
mode as an ending?

536. I say: i can think of this face (which gives an impression of
timidity) as courageous too. We do not mean by this that i can
imagine someone with this face perhaps saving someones life (that,
of course, is imaginable in connexion with any face). I am speaking
rather of an aspect of the face itself. Nor do i mean that i can imagine
that this mans face might change so that, in the ordinary sense, it looked
courageous; though i may very well mean that there is a quite definite
way in which it can change into a courageous face. The reinterpreta
tion of a facial expression can be compared to the reinterpretation
of a chord in music, when we hear it as a modulation first into this,
then into that key.

537. It is possible to say i read timidity in this face but at all
events the timidity does not seem to be merely associated, outwardly
connected, with the face; but fear is there, alive, in the features. If the
features change slightly, we can speak of a corresponding change in the

philosophical investigations 1 145*

fear. If we were asked can you think of this face as an expression of
courage too? We should, as it were, not know how to lodge courage
in these features. Then perhaps i say i dont know what it would
mean for this to be a courageous face. But what would an answer to
such a question be like? Perhaps one says: yes, now i understand:
the face as it were shews indifference to the outer world. So we
have somehow read courage into the face. Now once more, one might
say, courage fits this face. But what fits what here?

538. There is a related case (though perhaps it will not seem so)
when, for example, we (germans) are surprised that in french the
predicative adjective agrees with the substantive in gender, and when
we explain it to ourselves by saying: they mean: the man is a good
one.

539. I see a picture which represents a smiling face. What do i
do if i take the smile now as a kind one, now as malicious? Dont i
often imagine it with a spatial and temporal context which is one
either of kindness or malice? Thus i might supply the picture with the
fancy that the smiler was smiling down on a child at play, or again on
the suffering of an enemy.

This is in no way altered by the fact that i can also take the at first
sight gracious situation and interpret it differently by putting it into a
wider context. If no special circumstances reverse my interpretation
i shall conceive a particular smile as kind, call it a kind one, react
correspondingly.

((probability, frequency. ))

540. Isnt it very odd that i should be unableeven without the
institution of language and all its surroundingsto think that it will
soon stop raining? Do you want to say that it is queer that you
should be unable to say these words and mean them without those
surroundings?

Suppose someone were to point at the sky and come out with a
n umb er of unintelligible words. When we ask him what he means
he explains that the words mean thank heaven, itll soon stop
raining. He even explains to us the meaning of the individual words.
I will suppose him suddenly to come to himself and say that the
sentence was completely senseless, but that when he spoke it it had
seemed to him like a sentence in a language he knew. (positively

philosophical investigations i

146c

like a familiar quotation. )what am i to say now? Didnt he under
stand the sentence as he was saying it? Wasnt the whole meaning
there in the sentence?

541. But what did his understanding, and the meaning, consist in?
He uttered the sounds in a cheerful voice perhaps, pointing to the
sky, while it was still raining but was already beginning to clear
up; later he made a connexion between his words and the english
words.

542. But the point is, the words felt to him like the words of a
language he knew well. Yes: a criterion for that is that he later said
just that . And now do not say: the feel of the words in a language we
know is of a quite particular kind. (what is the expression of this
feeling? )

543. Can i not say: a cry, a laugh, are full of meaning?

And that means, roughly: much can be gathered from them.

544. When longing makes me cry oh, if only he would cornel
the feeling gives the words meaning. But does it give the individual
words their meanings?

But here one could also say that the feeling gave the words truth . And
from this you can see how the concepts merge here. (this recalls the
question: what is the meaning of a mathematical proposition? )

545. 4 but when one says i hope hell comedoesnt the feeling
give the word hope its meaning? (and what about the sentence
i do not hope for his coming any longer? ) the feeling does perhaps
give the word hope its special ring; that is, it is expressed in that
ring. If the feeling gives the word its meaning, then here meaning
means point. But why is the feeling the point?

Is hope a feeling? (characteristic marks. )

546. In this way i should like to say the words oh, let him
cornel are charged with my desire. And words can be wrung from
us, like a cry. Words can be hard to say: such, for example, as are
used to effect a renunciation, or to confess a weakness. (words are
also deeds. )

547. Negation: a mental activity. Negate something and observe
what you are doing. Do you perhaps inwardly shake your head? And
if you dois this process more deserving of our interest than, say.

Philosophical investigations i

i 47 e

that of writing a sign of negation in a sentence? Do you now know
the essence of negation?

548. What is the difference between the two processes: wishing that
something should happenand wishing that the same thing should not
happen?

If we want to represent it pictorially, we shall treat the picture of the
event in various ways: cross it out, put a line round it, and so on. But
this strikes us as a crude method of expression. In word-language
indeed we use the sign not. But this is like a clumsy expedient.
We think that in thought it is arranged differendy.

549. How can the word not* negate? The sign not indicates
that you are to take what follows negatively. We should like to say:
the sign of negation is our occasion for doing somethingpossibly
something very complicated. It is as if the negation-sign occasioned
our doing something. But what? That is not said. It is as if it only
needed to be hinted at; as if we already knew. As if no explanation
were needed, for we are in any case already acquainted with the
matter.

550. Negation, one might say, is a gesture of exclusion, of rejec
tion. But such a gesture is used in a great variety of cases!

551. Does the same negation occur in: iron does not melt at a
hundred degrees centigrade and twice two is not five? Is this to
be decided by introspection; by trying to see what we are thinking
as we utter the two sentences?

552. Suppose i were to ask: is it clear to us, while we are uttering
the sentences this rod is one yard long and here is one soldier.

(a) the fact that three negatives yield a negative again must
already be contained in the single negative that i am using now.
(the temptation to invent a myth of meaning. )

it looks as if it followed from the nature of negation that a double
negative is an affirmative. (and there is something right about this.
What? Our nature is connected with both. )

(b) there cannot be a question whether these or other rules are
the correct ones for the use of not. (i mean, whether they accord
with its meaning. ) for without these rules the word has as yet no
meaning; and if we change the rules, it now has another meaning (or
none), and in that case we may just as well change the word too.

I 4 8c philosophical investigations i

that we mean different things by one, that one has different
meanings? Not at all. Say e. G. Such a sentence as one yard is
occupied by one soldier, and so two yards are occupied by two
soldiers. Asked do you mean the same thing by both ones?
One would perhaps answer: of course i mean the same thing: one
(perhaps raising one finger. )

553. Now has 1 a different meaning when it stands for a measure
and when it stands for a number? If the question is framed in this
way, one will answer in the affirmative.

554. We can easily imagine human beings with a more primitive
logic, in which something corresponding to our negation is applied
only to certain sorts of sentence; perhaps to such as do not themselves
contain any negation. It would be possible to negate the proposition
he is going into the house, but a negation of the negative proposi
tion would be meaningless, or would count only as a repetition of the
negation. Think of means of expressing negation different from ours:
by the pitch of ones voice, for instance. What would a double negation
be like there?

555. The question whether negation had the same meaning to these
people as to us would be analogous to the question whether the figure
5 meant the same to people whose numbers ended at 5 as to us.

556. Imagine a language with two different words for negation,
x and y. Doubling x yields an affirmative, doubling y
a strengthened negative. For the rest the two words are used alike.
Now have x and y the same meaning in sentences where they
occur without being repeated? We could give various answers to
this.

(a) the two words have different uses. So they have different
meanings. But sentences in which they occur without being repeated
and which for the rest are the same make the same sense.

(b) the two words have the same function in language-games,
except for this one difference, which is just a trivial convention. The
use of the two words is taught in the same way, by means of the same
actions, gestures, pictures and so on; and in explanations of the words
the difference in the ways they are used is appended as something
incidental, as one of the capricious features of the language. For this
reason we shall say that x and y have the same meaning.

(c) we connect different images with the two negatives. X as it

philosophical investigations i 149 

were turns the sense through i8o. And that is why two such negatives
restore the sense to its former position. Y is like a shake of the
head. And just as one does not annul a shake of the head by shaking
it again, so also one doesnt cancel one y by a second one. And so
even if, practically speaking, sentences with the two signs of negation
come to the same thing, still x and y express different ideas.

557. Now, when i uttered the double negation, what constituted my
meaning it as a strengthened negative and not as an affirmative?

There is no answer running: it consisted in the fact that.

In certain circumstances instead of saying this duplication is meant
as a strengthening, i can pronounce it as a strengthening. Instead of
saying the duplication of the negative is meant to cancel it i can
e. G. Put brackets. Yes, but after all these brackets may themselves
have various roles; for who says that they are to be taken as brackets ?
No one does. And havent you explained your own conception in
turn by means of words? The meaning of the brackets lies in the
technique of applying them. The question is: under what circumstances
does it make sense to say i meant . . . And what circumstances
justify me in saying he meant . . . . ?

558. What does it mean to say that the is in the rose is red
has a different meaning from the is in twice two is four? If it is
answered that it means that different rules are valid for these two
words, we can say that we have only one word here. And if all i am
attending to is grammatical rules, these do allow the use of the word
is in both connexions. But the rule which shews that the word
is has different meanings in these sentences is the one allowing us
to replace the word is in the second sentence by the sign of equality,
and forbidding this substitution in the first sentence.

559. One would like to speak of the function of a word in this
sentence. As if the sentence were a mechanism in which the word
had a particular function. But what does this function consist in?
How does it come to light? For there isnt anything hiddendont
we see the whole sentence? The function must come out in operat
ing with the word. ((meaning-body. ))

560. The meaning of a word is what is explained by the explana
tion of the meaning. I. E. : if you want to understand the use of the
word meaning, look for what are called explanations of meaning.

I 50  philosophical investigations i

j6i. Now isnt it queer that i say that the word is is used with
two different meanings (as the copula and as the sign of equality),
and should not care to say that its meaning is its use; its use, that is,
as the copula and the sign of equality?

One would like to say that these two kinds of use do not yield a
single meaning; the union under one head is an accident, a mere in
essential.

562. But how can i decide what is an essential, and what an in
essential, accidental, feature of the notation? Is there some reality
lying behind the notation, which shapes its grammar?

Let us think of a similar case in a game: in draughts a king is marked
by putting one piece on top of another. Now wont one say it is in
essential to the game for a king to consist of two pieces?

563. Let us say that the meaning of a piece is its role in the game.
Now let it be decided by lot which of the players gets white before
any game of chess begins. To this end one player holds a kin g in each
closed fist while the other chooses one of the two hands at random.
Will it be counted as part of the role of the king in chess that it is used
to draw lots in this way?

564. So i am inclined to distinguish between the essential and the
inessential in a game too. The game, one would like to say, has not
only rules but also a point .

565. Why the same word? In the calculus we make no use of this
identity iwhy the same piece for both purposes? But what does it
mean here to speak of making use of the identity? For isnt it a
use, if we do in fact use the same word?

5 66. And now it looks as if the use of the same word or the same
piece, had a purpose if the identity is not accidental, inessential. And
as if the purpose were that one should be able to recognize the piece
and know how to play. Are we talking about a physical or a logical
possibility here? If the latter then the identity of the piece is something
to do with the game.

567. But, after all, the game is supposed to be defined by the rules!
So, if a rule of the game prescribes that the kings are to be used for
drawing lots before a game of chess, then that is an essential part of
the game. What objection might one make to this? That one does not
see the point of this prescription. Perhaps as one wouldnt see the point
either of a rule by which each piece had to be turned round three times

philosophical investigations i

151

before one moved it. If we found this rule in a board-game we should
be surprised and should speculate about the purpose of the rule.
(was this prescription meant to prevent one from moving without
due consideration? )

568. If i understand the character of the game arighti might
saythen this isnt an essential part of it.

((meaning is a physiognomy. ))

569. Language is an instrument. Its concepts are instruments.
Now perhaps one thinks that it can make no great difference which
concepts we employ. As, after all, it is possible to do physics in feet
and inches as well as in metres and centimetres; the difference is
merely one of convenience. But even this is not true if, for instance,
calculations in some system of measurement demand more time and
trouble than it is possible for us to give them.

570. Concepts lead us to make investigations; are the expression
of our interest, and direct our interest.

571. Misleading parallel: psychology treats of processes in the
psychical sphere, as does physics in the physical.

Seeing, hearing, thinking, feeling, willing, are not the subject of
psychology in the same sense as that in which the movements of bodies,
the phenomena of electricity etc. , are the subject of physics. You can
see this from the fact that the physicist sees, hears, thinks about, and
informs us of these phenomena, and the psychologist observes the
external reactions (the behaviour) of the subject.

572. Expectation is, grammatically, a state; like: being of an
opinion, hoping for something, knowing something, being able to do
something. But in order to understand the grammar of these states
it is necessary to ask: what counts as a criterion for anyones being in
such a state? (states of hardness, of weight, of fitting. )

573. To have an opinion is a state. A state of what? Of the soul?
Of the mind? Well, of what object does one say that it has an opinion?
Of mr. N. N. For example. And that is the correct answer.

One should not expect to be enlightened by the answer to that
question. Others go deeper: what, in particular cases, do we regard
as criteria for someones being of such-and-such an opinion? When
do we say: he reached this opinion at that time? When: he has altered
his opinion? And so on. The picture which the answers to these
questions give us shews what gets treated grammatically as a state here.

Philosophical investigations i

152*

574. A proposition, and hence in another sense a thought, can be
the expression" of belief, hope, expectation, etc. But believing is
not thinking. (a grammatical remark. ) the concepts of believing,
expecting, hoping are less distantly related to one another than they are
to the concept of thinking.

575. When i sat down on this chair, of course i believed it would
bear me. I had no thought of its possibly collapsing.

But: in spite of everything that he did, i held fast to the belief....
Here there is thought, and perhaps a constant struggle to renew an
attitude.

576. I watch a slow match burning, in high excitement follow
the progress of the burning and its approach to the explosive. Perhaps
i dont think anything at all or have a multitude of disconnected
thoughts. This is certainly a case of expecting.

577. We say i am expecting him, when we believe that he will
come, though his coming does not occupy our thoughts . (here i am
expecting him would mean i should be surprised if he didnt come
and that will not be called the description of a state of mind. ) but
we also say i am expecting him when it is supposed to mean:
i am eagerly awaiting him. We could imagine a language in which
different verbs were consistently used in these cases. And similarly
more than one verb where we speak of believing, hoping and so on.
Perhaps the concepts of such a language would be more suitable for
understanding psychology than the concepts of our language.

578. Ask yourself: what does it mean to believe goldbachs
theorem? What does this belief consist in? In a feeling of certainty as
we state, hear, or think the theorem? (that would not interest us. )
and what are the characteristics of this feeling? Why, i dont even
know how far the feeling may be caused by the proposition itself.

Am i to say that belief is a particular colouring of our thoughts?
Where does this idea come from? Well, there is a tone of belief, as of
doubt.

I should like to ask: how does the belief connect with this proposi
tion? Let us look and see what are the consequences of this belief,
where it takes us. It makes me search for a proof of the proposition.
Very well; and now let us look and see what your searching really
consists in. Then we shall know what belief in the proposition amounts
to.

Philosophical investigations i i53 e

579. The feeling of confidence. How is this manifested in
behaviour?

580. An inner process stands in need of outward criteria.

581. An expectation is imbedded in a situation, from which it
arises. The expectation of an explosion may, for example, arise from
a situation in which an explosion is to be expected.

582. If someone whispers itll go off now, instead of saying i
expect the explosion any moment, still his words do not describe a
feeling; although they and their tone may be a manifestation of his
feeling.

583. But you talk as if i werent really expecting, hoping, now 
as i thought i was. As if what were happening now had no deep
significance. What does it mean to say what is happening now has
significance of has deep significance? What is a deep feeling?
Could someone have a feeling of ardent love or hope for the space of

one second no matter what preceded or followed this second? -

what is happening now has significancein these surroundings.
The surroundings give it its importance. And the word hope
refers to a phenomenon of human life. (a smiling mouth smiles only
in a human face. )

584. Now suppose i sit in my room and hope that n. N. Will come
and bring me some money, and suppose one minute of this state could
be isolated, cut out of its context; would what happened in it then not
be hope? Think, for example, of the words which you perhaps utter
in this space of time. They are no longer part of this language. And
in different surroundings the institution of money doesnt exist either.

A coronation is the picture of pomp and dignity. Cut one minute
of this proceeding out of its surroundings: the crown is being placed
on the head of the king in his coronation robes. But in different
surroundings gold is the cheapest of metals, its gleam is thought
vulgar. There the fabric of the robe is cheap to produce. A crown is
a parody of a respectable hat. And so on.

585. When someone says i hope hell comeis this a report
about his state of mind, or a manifestation of his hope? I can, for
example, say it to myself. And surely i am not giving myself a report.
It may be a sigh; but it need not. If i tell someone i cant keep
my mind on my work today; i keep on thinking of his coming
this will be called a description of my state of mind.

154  philosophical investigations i

5 86. I have heard he is coming; i have been waiting for him all
day. That is a report on how i have spent the day. -in conversa

tion i came to the conclusion that a particular event is to be expected,
and i draw this conclusion in the words: so now i must expect him
to come. This may be called the first thought, the first act, of this

expectation. -the exclamation im longing to see himl may be

called an act of expecting. But i can utter the same words as the result
of self-observation, and then they might mean: so, after all that has
happened, i am still longing to see him. The point is: what led up
to these words?

587. Does it make sense to ask how do you know that you
believe? And is the answer: i know it by introspection?

In some cases it will be possible to say some such thing, in most
not.

It makes sense to ask: do i really love her, or am i only pretending
to myself? And the process of introspection is the calling up of
memories; of imagined possible situations, and of the feelings that one
would have if... .

588. I am revolving the decision to go away to-morrow. (this

may be called a description of a state of mind. )-your arguments

dont convince me; now as before it is my intention to go away to
morrow. Here one is tempted to call the intention a feeling. The
feeling is one of a certain rigidity; of unalterable determination. (but

there are many different characteristic feelings and attitudes here. )-

i am asked: how long are you staying here? I reply: to-morrow
i am going away; its the end of my holidays. But over against this:
i say at the end of a quarrel all right i then i leave to-morrow! ;
i make a decision.

589. In my heart i have determined on it. And one is even
inclined to point to ones breast as one says it. Psychologically this
way of speaking should be taken seriously. Why should it be taken
less seriously than the assertion that belief is a state of mind? (luther:
faith is under the left nipple. )

590. Someone might learn to understand the meaning of the
expression seriously meaning what one says by means of a gesture
of pointing at the heart. But now we must ask: how does it come
out that he has learnt it?

Philosophical investigations i i j5 e

5 91. Am i to say that any one who has an intention has an ex
perience of tending towards something? That there are particular
experiences of tending? Remember this case: if one urgently wants
to make some remark, some objection, in a discussion, it often happens
that one opens ones mouth, draws a breath and holds it; if one then
decides to let the objection go, one lets the breath out. The experience
of this process is evidently the experience of veering towards saying
something. Anyone who observes me will know that i wanted to
say something and then thought better of it. In this situation, that is.
In a different one he would not so interpret my behaviour, however
characteristic of the intention to speak it may be in the present situation.
And is there any reason for assuming that this same experience could
not occur in some quite different situationin which it has nothing
to do with any tending?

592. But when you say i intend to go away, you surely mean it!
Here again it just is the mental act of meaning that gives the sentence
life. If you merely repeat the sentence after someone else, say in order
to mock his way of speaking, then you say it without this act of
meaning. When we are doing philosophy it can sometimes look
like that. But let us really think out various different situations and
conversations, and the ways in which that sentence will be uttered in
them. I always discover a mental undertone; perhaps not always
the same one. And was there no undertone there when you repeated
the sentence after someone else? And how is the undertone to be
separated from the rest of the experience of speaking?

593. A main cause of philosophical diseasea one-sided diet: one
nourishes ones thinking with only one kind of example.

594. But the words, significantly uttered, have after all not only
a surface, but also the dimension of depth! After all, it just is the
case that something different takes place when they are uttered sig
nificantly from when they are merely uttered. How i express this is
not the point. Whether i say that in the first case they have depth; or
that something goes on in me, inside my mind, as i utter them; or
that they have an atmosphereit always comes to the same thing.

Well, if we all agree about it, wont it be true?

(i cannot accept someone elses testimony, because it is not testimony .
It only tells me what he is inclined to say. )

595. It is natural for us to say a sentence in such-and-such sur
roundings, and unnatural to say it in isolation. Are we to say that

ijfta philosophical investigations i

there is a particular feeling accompanying the utterance of every
sentence when we say it naturally?

596. The feeling of familiarity and of naturalness. It is easier
to get at a feeling of unfamiliarity and of unnaturalness. Or, at feelings.
For not everything which is unfamiliar to us makes an impression of
unfamiliari ty upon us. Here one has to consider what we call un
familiar. If a boulder lies on the road, we know it for a boulder,
but perhaps not for the one which has always lain there. We recognize
a man, say, as a man, but not as an acquaintance. There are feelings of
old acquaintan ce: they are sometimes expressed by a particular way
of looking or by the words: the same old room! (which i occupied
many years before and now returning find unchanged). Equally
there are feelings of strangeness. I stop short, look at the object or
man questioningly or mistrustfully, say i find it all strange.
But the existence of this feeling of strangeness does not give us a
reason for saying that every object which we know well and which
does not seem strange to us gives us a feeling of familiarity. We
think that, as it were, the place once filled by the feeling of strangeness
must surely be occupied somehow . The place for this kind of atmosphere
is there, and if one of them is not in possession of it, then another is.

597. Just as germanisms creep into the speech of a german who
speaks english well although he does not first construct the german
expression and then translate it into english; just as this makes him
speak pnglisb as if he were translating unconsciously from the german
so we often think as if our thinking were founded on a thought-
schema: as if we were translating from a more primitive mode of
thought into ours.

598. When we do philosophy, we should like to hypostatize
filin gs where there are none. They serve to explain our thoughts
to us.

Here explanation of our thinking demands a feeling 1  it is as if our
conviction were simply consequent upon this requirement.

599. In philosophy we do not draw conclusions. But it must be
like this 1  is not a philosophical proposition. Philosophy only states
what everyone admits.

600. Does everything that we do not find conspicuous make an
impression of inconspicuousness? Does what is ordinary always
make the impression of ordinariness?

Philosophical investigations i , j7 e

601. When i talk about this table, am i remembering that this
object is called a table?

602. Asked did you recognize your desk when you entered your
room this morning? I should no doubt say certainly 1  and yet
it would be misleading to say that an act of recognition had taken
place. Of course the desk was not strange to me; i was not surprised
to see it, as i should have been if another one had been standing there,
or some unfamiliar kind of object.

603. No one will say that every time i enter my room, my long-
familiar surroundings, there is enacted a recognition of all that i see
and have seen hundreds of times before.

604. It is easy to have a false picture of the processes called
recognizing; as if recognizing always consisted in co mparing two
impressions with one another. It is as if i carried a picture of an object
with me and used it to perform an identification of an object as the one
represented by the picture. Our memory seems to us to be the agent of
such a comparison, by preserving a picture of what has been seen
before, or by allowing us to look into the past (as if down a spy-glass).

60 j. And it is not so much as if i were comparing the object
with a picture set beside it, but as if the object coincided with the picture.
So i see only one thing, not two.

606. We say the expression in his voice was genuine . If it was
spurious we think as it were of another one behind it . This is the
face he shews the world, inwardly he has another one. But this does
not mean that when his expression is genuine he has two the same.

((a quite particular expression. ))

607. How does one judge what time it is? I do not mean by
external evidences, however, such as the position of the sun, the
lightness of the room, and so on. One asks oneself, say, what timp
can it be? , pauses a moment, perhaps imagines a clock-face, and
then says a time. Or one considers various possibilities, thinks first
of one time, then of another, and in the end stops at one. That is the

kind of way it is done. -but isnt the idea accompanied by a feeling

of conviction; and doesnt that mean that it accords with an inner
clock? No, i dont read the time off from any clock; there is a feeling
of conviction inasmuch as i say a time to myself without feeling any
doubt, with calm assurance. But doesnt something click as i say

ij8e philosophical investigations i

this time? Not that i know of; unless that is what you call the coming-
to-rest of deliberation, the stopping at one number. Nor should i ever
have spoken of a feeling of conviction* here, but should have said:
i considered a while and then plumped for its being quarter past five.
But what did i go by? I might perhaps have said: simply by feel,

which only means that i left it to what should suggest itself. -

but you surely must at least have disposed yourself in a definite way
in order to guess the time; and you dont take just any idea of a time
of day as yielding the correct time ito repeat: i asked myself i
wonder what time it is? That is, i did not, for example, read this
question in some narrative, or quote it as someone elses utterance;
nor was i practising the pronunciation of these words; and so on.
These were not the circumstances of my saying the words. But then,
what were the circumstances? I was thinking about my breakfast
and wondering whether it would be late today. These were the kind
of circumstances. But do you really not see that you were all the same
disposed in a way which, though impalpable, is characteristic of guess
ing the time, like being surrounded by a characteristic atmosphere?
Yes; what was characteristic was that i said to myself i wonder
what time it is? And if this sentence has a particular atmosphere,
how am i to separate it from the sentence itself? It would never have
occurred to me to think the sentence had such an aura if i had not
thought of how one might say it differentlyas a quotation, as a joke,
as practice in elocution, and so on. And then all at once i wanted to
say, then all at once it seemed to me, that i must after all have meant
the words somehow specially; differently, that is, from in those other
cases. The picture of the special atmosphere forced itself upon me;
i can see it quite clear before meso long, that is, as i do not look
at what my memory tells me really happened.

And as for the feeling of certainty: i sometimes say to myself i am
sure its . . . Oclock, and in a more or less confident tone of voice,
and so on. If you ask me the reason for this certainty i have none.

If i say, i read it off from an inner clock, that is a picture, and the
only thing that corresponds to it is that i said it was such-and-such a
time. And the purpose of the picture is to assimilate this case to the
other one. I am refusing to acknowledge two different cases here.

608. The idea of the intangibility of that mental state in estimating
the time is of the greatest importance. Why is it intangible ? Isnt it

philosophical investigations i ij9 

because we refuse to count what is tangible about our state as part of
the specific state which we are postulating?

609. The description of ah atmosphere is a special application of
language, for special purposes.

((interpreting understanding as atmosphere; as a mental act. One
can construct an atmosphere to attach to anything. An indescribable
character. ))

610. Describe the aroma of coffee. Why cant it be done? Do we
lack the words? And for what are words lacking? But how do we get
the idea that such a description must after all be possible? Have you
ever felt the lack of such a description? Have you tried to describe
the aroma and not succeeded?

((i should like to say: these notes say something glorious, but i
do not know what. These notes are a powerful gesture, but i cannot
put anything side by side with it that will serve as an explanation.
A grave nod. James: our vocabulary is inadequate. Then why
dont we introduce a new one? What would have to be the case for us
to be able to? ))

611. Willing too is merely an experience, one would like to say
(the will too only idea). It comes when it comes, and i cannot bring
it about.

Not bring it about? Like what ? What can i bring about, then?
What am i comparing willing with when i say this?

612. I should not say of the movement of my arm, for example:
it comes when it comes, etc.. And this is the region in which we say
significantly that a thing doesnt simply happen to us, but that we do
it. I dont need to wait for my arm to go upi can raise it. And
here i am making a contrast between the movement of my arm and,
say, the fact that the violent thudding of my heart will subside.

61 j. In the sense in which i can ever bring anything about (such
as stomach-ache through over-eating), i can also bring about an act
of willing. In this sense i bring about the act of willing to s wim by
jumping into the water. Doubtless i was trying to say: i cant will
willing; that is, it makes no sense to speak of willing willing.  Willin g
is not the name of an action; and so not the name of any voluntary
action either. And my use of a wrong expression came from our
wanting to think of willing as an immediate non-causal bringing-
about. A misleading analogy lies at the root of this idea; the causal

i6 0 e philosophical investigations i

nexus seems to be established by a mechanism connecting two parts of
a machine. The connexion may be broken if the mechanism is dis
turbed. (we think only of the disturbances to which a mechanism is
normally subject, not, say, of cog-wheels suddenly going soft, or
passing through one another, and so on. )

614. When i raise my arm voluntarily i do not use any instru
ment to bring the movement about. My wish is not such an instrument
either.

615. Willing, if it is not to be a sort of wishing, must be the
action itself. It cannot be allowed to stop anywhere short of the action.
If it is the action, then it is so in the ordinary sense of the word;
so it is speaking, writing, walking, lifting a thing, imagining some
thing. But it is also trying, attempting, making an effort, to speak,
to write, to lift a thing, to imagine something etc..

616. When i raise my arm, i have not wished it might go up.
The voluntary action excludes this wish. It is indeed possible to say:
i hope i shall draw the circle faultlessly. And that is to express a wish
that ones hand should move in such-and-such a way.

617. If we cross our fingers in a certain special way we are some
times unable to move a particular finger when someone tells us to do
so, if he only points to the fingermerely shews it to the eye. If on
the other hand he touches it, we can move it. One would like to
describe this experience as follows: we are unable to will to move the
finger. The case is quite different from that in which we are not able
to move the finger because someone is, say, holding it. One now feels
inclined to describe the former case by saying: one cant find any point
of application for the will till the finger is touched. Only when one
feels the finger can the will know where it is to catch hold. But this
kind of expression is misleading. One would like to say: how am
i to know where i am to catch hold with the will, if feeling does not
shew the place? But then how is it known to what point i am to
direct the will when the feeling is there?

That in this case the finger is as it were paralysed until we feel a
touch on it is shewn by experience; it could not have been seen a
priori .

618. One imagines the willing subject here as something without
any mass (without any inertia); as a motor which has no inertia in
itself to overcome. And so it is only mover, not moved. That is:

philosophical investigations i i6ie

one can say i will, but my body does not obey mebut not: my
will does not obey me. (augustine. )

but in the sense in which i cannot fail to will, i cannot try to will
either.

619. And one might say: i can always will only inasmuch as i can
never try to will.

620. Doing itself seems not to have any volume of experience. It
seems like an extensionless point, the point of a needle. This point
seems to be the real agent. And the phenomenal happenings only to be
consequences of this acting. I do . .. Seems to have a definite sense,
separate from all experience.

621. Let us not forget this: when i raise my arm, my arm goes up.
And the problem arises: what is left over if i subtract the fact that my
arm goes up from the fact that i raise my arm?

((are the kinaesthetic sensations my willing? ))

622. When i raise my arm i do not usually try to raise it.

623. At all costs i will get to that house. But if there is no
difficulty about it can i try at all costs to get to the house?

624. In the laboratory, when subjected to an electric current, for
example, someone says with his eyes shut i am moving my arm up
and downthough his arm is not moving. So, we say, he has
the special feeling of making that movement. Move your atm to
and fro with your eyes shut. And now try, while you do so, to tell
yourself that your arm is staying still and that you are only having
certain queer feelings in your muscles and joints!

625. How do you know that you have raised your arm? I
feel it. So what you recognize is the feeling? And are you certain
that you recognize it right? You are certain that you have raised your
arm; isnt this the criterion, the - measure, of the recognition?

62 6. When i touch this object with a stick i have the sensation of
touching in the tip of the stick, not in the hand that holds it. When
someone says the pain isnt here in my hand, but in my wrist,
this has the consequence that the doctor examines the wrist. But
what difference does it make if i say that i feel the hardness of the

i(tie philosophical investigations

object in the tip of the stick or in my hand? Does what i say mean
it is as if i had nerve-endings in the tip of the stick? In what sense is it
like that? Well, i am at any rate inclined to say i feel the hardness
etc. In the tip of the stick. What goes with this is that when i touch
the object i look not at my hand but at the tip of the stick; that i
describe what i feel by saying i feel something hard and round

there_not i feel a pressure against the tips of my thumb, middle

finger, and index finger. . . . If, for example, someone asks me
what are you now feeling in the fingers that hold the probe? I

might reply: i dont know-1 feel something hard and rough over

there. "

627. Examine the following description of a voluntary action: i
form the decision to pull the bell at 5 oclock, and when it strikes 5, my
arm makes this movement. Is that the correct description, and not

this one: . And when it strikes 5, i raise my arm? -one

would like to supplement the first description: and seel my arm goes
up when it strikes 5. And this and seel is precisely what doesnt
belong here. I do not say see, my arm is going upl when i raise it.

628. So one might say: voluntary movement is marked by the
absence of surprise. And now i do not mean you to ask but why
isnt one surprised here?

629. When people talk about the possibility of foreknowledge of
the future they always forget the fact of the prediction of ones own
voluntary movements.

630. Examine these two language-games:

(a) someone gives someone else the order to make particular
movements with his arm, or to assume particular bodily positions
(gymnastics instructor and pupil). And here is a variation of this
language-game: the pupil gives himself orders and then carries them
out.

(b) someone observes certain regular processesfor example, the
reactions of different metals to acidsand thereupon makes predictions
about the reactions that will occur in certain particular cases.

There is an evident kinship between these two language-games, and
also a fundamental difference. In both one might call the spoken
words predictions. But compare the training, which leads to the
first technique with the training for the second one.

Philosophical investigations i i6 3 e

631. I am going to take two powders now, and in half-an-hour
i shall be sick. It explains nothing to say that in the first case i am
the agent, in the second merely the observer. Or that in the first case
i see the causal connexion from inside, in the second from outside.
And much else to the same effect.

Nor is it to the point to say that a prediction of the first kind is
no more infallible than one of the second kind.

It was not on the ground of observations of my behaviour that i
said i was going to take two powders. The antecedents of this proposi
tion were different. I mean the thoughts, actions and so on which led
up to it. And it can only mislead you to say: the only essential
presupposition of your utterance was just your decision.

632. I do not want to say that in the case of the expression of
intention i am going to take two powders the prediction is a cause
and its fulfilment the effect. (perhaps a physiological investigation
could determine this. ) so much, however, is true: we can often predict
a mans actions from his expression of a decision. An important
language-game.

633. You were interrupted a while ago; do you still know what
you were going to say? If i do know now, and say itdoes that
mean that i had already thought it before, only not said it? No.
Unless you take the certainty with which i continue the interrupted
sentence as a criterion of the thoughts already having been completed
at that time. But, of course, the situation and the thoughts which i
had contained all sorts of things to help the continuation of the
sentence.

634. When i continue the interrupted sentence and say that this was
how i had been going to continue it, this is like following out a line
of thought from brief notes.

Then dont i interpret the notes? Was only one continuation possible
in these circumstances? Of course not. But i did not choose between
interpretations. I remembered that i was going to say this.

635. I was going to say. You remember various details.

But not even all of them together shew your intention. It is as if a
snapshot of a scene had been taken, but only a few scattered details of
it were to be seen: here a hand, there a bit of a face, or a hatthe
rest is dark. And now it is as if we knew quite certainly what the whole
picture represented. As if i could read the darkness.

Philosophical investigations i

164^

636. These details are not irrelevant in the sense in which other
circumstances which i can remember equally well are irrelevant.
But if i tell someone for a moment i was going to say .... He does
not learn those details from this, nor need he guess them. He need
not know, for instance, that i had already opened my mouth to speak.
But he can fill out the picture in this way. (and this capacity is part
of understanding what i tell him. )

637. I know exactly what i was going to say! And yet i did not
say it. And yet i dont read it off from some other process which took
place then and which i remember.

Nor am i interpreting that situation and its antecedents. For i dont
consider them and dont judge them.

638. How does it come about that in spite of this i am inclined to
see an interpretation in saying for a moment i was going to deceive
him?

How can you be certain that for the space of a moment you were
going to deceive him? Werent your actions and thoughts much too
rudimentary?

For cant the evidence be too scanty? Yes, when one follows it up
it seems extraordinarily scanty; but isnt this because one is taking no
account of the history of this evidence? Certain antecedents were
necessary for me to have had a momentary intention of pretending
to someone else that i was unwell.

If someone says for a moment. Is he really only describing

a momentary process?

But not even the whole story was my evidence for saying for a
moment.

639. One would like to say that an opinion develops . But there is a
mistake in this too.

640. This thought ties on to thoughts which i have had before.
How does it do so? Through a feeling of such a tie? But how can a
feeling really tie thoughts together? The word feeling is very
misleading here. But it is sometimes possible to say with certainty:
this thought is connected with those earlier thoughts, and yet be
unable to shew the connexion. Perhaps that comes later.

641. My intention was no less certain as it was than it would have
been if i had said now ill deceive him. But if you had said the
words, would you necessarily have meant them quite seriously? (thus

philosophical investigations i i6je

the most explicit expression of intention is by itself insufficient evidence
of intention. )

642. At that moment i hated him. What happened here?
Didnt it consist in thoughts, feelings, and actions? And if i were
to rehearse that moment to myself i should assume a particular expres
sion, think of certain happenings, breathe in a particular way, arouse
certain feelings in myself. I might think up a conversation, a whole
scene in which that hatred flared up. And i might play this scene
through with feelings approximating to those of a real occasion.
That i have actually experienced something of the sort will naturally
help me to do so.

643. If i now become ashamed of this incident, i am ashamed of
the whole thing: of the words, of the poisonous tone, etc..

644. I am not ashamed of what i did then, but of the intention
which i had. And didnt the intention lie also in what i did? What
justifies the shame? The whole history of the incident.

645. For a moment i meant to . . . . That is, i had a particular

feeling, an inner experience; and i remember it. -and now remem

ber quite precisely 1 then the inner experience of intending seems to
vanish again. Instead one remembers thoughts, feelings, movements,
and also connexions with earlier situations.

It is as if one had altered the adjustment of a microscope. One did
not see before what is now in focus.

646. Well, that only shews that you have adjusted your micro
scope wrong. You were supposed to look at a particular section of the
culture, and you are seeing a different one.

There is something right about that. But suppose that (with a
particular adjustment of the lenses) i did remember a single sensation;
how have i the right to say that it is what i call the intention? It
might be that (for example) a particular tickle accompanied every one of
my intentions.

647. What is the natural expression of an intention? Look at a
cat when it stalks a bird; or a beast when it wants to escape.

((connexion with propositions about sensations. ))

648. I no longer remember the words i used, but i remember my
intention precisely; i meant my words to quiet him. What does my
memory shew me; what does it bring before my min d? Suppose it did

i66e philosophical investigations i

nothing but suggest those words to me! And perhaps others which
fill out the picture still more exactly. (i don't remember my words
any more, but i certainly remember their spirit. ")

649. So if a man has not learned a language, is he unable to have
certain memories? " of coursehe cannot have verbal memories,
verbal wishes or fears, and so on. And memories etc. , in language, are
not mere threadbare representations of the real experiences; for is what
is linguistic not an experience?

650. We say a dog is afraid his master will beat him; but not, he is
afraid his master will beat him to-morrow. Why not?

651. I remember that i should have been glad then to stay still
longer. What picture of this wish came before my mind? None at
all. What i see in my memory allows no conclusion as to my feelings.
And yet i remember quite clearly that they were there.

652. He measured him with a hostile glance and said . . . . "
the reader of the narrative understands this; he has no doubt in his
mind. Now you say: very well, he supplies the meaning, he guesses
it. Generally speaking: no. Generally speaking he supplies nothing,
guesses nothing. But it is also possible that the hostile glance and the
words later prove to have been pretence, or that the reader is kept in
doubt whether they are so or not, and so that he really does guess at a
possible interpretation. But then the main thing he guesses at is a
context. He says to himself for example: the two men who are here
so hostile to one another are in reality friends, etc. Etc.

((if you want to understand a sentence, you have to imagine the
psychical significance, the states of mind involved. ))

65}. Imagine this case: i tell someone that i walked a certain
route, going by a map which i had prepared beforehand. Thereupon
i shew him the map, and it consists of lines on a piece of paper; but i
cannot explain how these lines are the map of my movements, i
cannot tell him any rule for interpreting the map. Yet i did follow
the drawing with all the characteristic tokens of reading a map.
I might call such a drawing a private' map; or the phenomenon
that i have described following a private map. (but this expression
would, of course, be very easy to misunderstand. )

could i now say: i read off my having then meant to do such-and-

philosophical investigations i

167c

such, as if from a map, although there is no map? But that means
nothing but: i am now inclined to say i read the intention of acting
thus in certain states of mind which i remember.

654. Our mistake is to look for an explanation where we ought to
look at what happens as a c proto-phenomenon\ that is, where we
ought to have said: this language-game is played .

6jj. The question is not one of explaining a language-game by
means of our experiences, but of noting a language-game.

656. What is the purpose of telling someone that a time ago i
had such-and-such a wish? Look on the language-game as the primary
thing. And look on the feelings, etc. , as you look on a way of
regarding the language-game, as interpretation.

It might be asked: how did human beings ever come to make
the verbal utterances which we call reports of past wishes or past
intentions?

657. Let us imagine these utterances always taking this form: i
said to myself: if only i could stay longer p  the purpose of such a
statement might be to acquaint someone with my reactions. (compare
the grammar of mean and vouloir dire. )

658. Suppose we expressed the fact that a man had an intention
by saying he as it were said to himself i will... . * that is the
picture. And now i want to know: how does one employ the expres
sion as it were to say something to oneself? For it does not mean:
to say something to oneself.

659. Why do i want to tell him about an intention too, as well as
telling him what i did? Not because the intention was also something
which was going on at that time. But because i want to tell him
something about myself which goes beyond what happened at that
time.

I reveal to him something of myself when i tell him what i was going
to do. Not, however, on grounds of self-observation, but by way of
a response (it might also be called an intuition).

660. The grammar of the expression i was then going to say ....
Is related to that of the expression i could then have gone on.

In the one case i remember an intention, in the other i remember
having understood.

I68 philosophical investigations i

661. I remember having meant him. Am i remembering a process
or state? When did it begin, what was its course; etc. ?

662. In an only slightly different situation, instead of silently
beckoning, he would have said to someone tell n. To come to me.
One can now say that the words i wanted n. To come to me describe
the state of my mind at that time; and again one may not say so.

66 3. If i say i meant him" very likely a picture comes to my mind,
perhaps of how i looked at him, etc. ; but the picture is only like an
illustration to a story. From it alone it would mostly be impossible
to conclude anything at all; only when one knows the story does one
know the significance of the picture.

664. In the use of words one might distinguish surface grammar
from depth grammar. What immediately impresses itself upon us
about the use of a word is the way it is used in the construction of the
sentence, the part of its useone might saythat can be taken in

by the ear. -and now compare the depth grammar, say of the word

to mean, with what its surface grammar would lead us to suspect.
No wonder we find it difficult to know our way about.

66 j. Imagine someone pointing to his cheek with an expression of
pain and saying abracadabra! We ask what do you mean?
And he answers i meant toothache. You at once think to yourself:
how can one mean toothache by that word? Or what did it mean to
mean pain by that word? And yet, in a different context, you would
have asserted that the mental activity of meaning such-and-such was
just what was most important in using language.

Butcant i say by abracadabra i mean toothache? Of course
i can; but this is a definition; not a description of what goes on in me
when i utter the word.

666. Imagine that you were in pain and were simultaneously
hearing a nearby piano being tuned. You say itll soon stop.
It certainly makes quite a difference whether you mean the pain or the
piano-tuning 1 of course; but what does this difference consist in?
I ahmit-j in many cases some direction of the attention will correspond
to your meaning one thing or another, just as a look often does, or a
gesture, or a way of shutting ones eyes which might be called looking
into oneself.

Philosophical investigations i

169

667. Imagine someone simulating pain, and then saying it'll get
better soon. Can't one say he means the pain? And yet he is not
concentrating his attention on any pain. And what about when i
finally say it's stopped now?

668. But can't one also lie in this way: one says it'll stop soon,

and means painbut when asked what did you mean? One answers
the noise in the next room? In this sort of case one may say: i
was going to answer.... But thought better of it and did answer.

669. One can refer to an object when speaking by pointing to it.
Here pointing is a part of the language-game. And now it seems to us
as if one spoke of a sensation by directing one's attention to it. But
where is the analogy? It evidently lies in the fact that one can point
to a thing by looking or listening.

But in certain circumstances, even pointing to the object one is
talking about may be quite inessential to the language-game, to one's
thought.

670. Imagine that you were telephoning someone and you said to
him: this table is too tall, and pointed to the table. What is the
role of pointing here? Can i say: i mean the table in question by pointing
to it? What is this pointing for, and what are these words and what
ever else may accompany them for?

671. And what do i point to by the inner activity of listening? To
the sound that comes to my ears, and to the silence when i hear
nothing

listening as it were looks for an auditory impression and hence
can't point to it, but only to the place where it is looking for it.

672. If a receptive attitude is called a kind of pointing' to some
thingthen that something is not the sensation which we get by means
of it.

673. The mental attitude doesn't  accompany ' what is said in the
sense in which a gesture accompanies it. (as a man can travel alone,
and yet be accompanied by my good wishes; or as a room can be
empty, and yet full of light. )

674. Does one say, for example: i didn't really mean my pain
just now; my mind wasn't on it enough for that? Do i ask myself,
say: what did i mean by this word just now? My attention was
divided between my pain and the noise?

Philosophical investigations i

i7<>e

675. Tell me, what was going on in you when you uttered the

words . . .. ? The answer to this is not: i was meaning i

676. I meant this by that word is a statement which is differently
used from one about an affection of the mind.

677. On the other hand: when you were swearing just now, did
you really mean it? This is perhaps as much as to say: were you
really angry? And the answer may be given as a result of intro
spection and is often some such thing as: i didnt mean it very
seriously, i meant it half jokingly and so on. There are differences
of degree here.

And one does indeed also say i was half thinking of him when i
said that.

678. What does this act of meaning (the pain, or the piano-tuning)
consist in? No answer comesfor the answers which at first sight
suggest themselves are of no use. And yet at the time i meant the
one thing and not the other. Yes, now you have only repeated with
emphasis something which no one has contradicted anyway.

679. But can you doubt that you meant this? " no; but neither
can i be certain of it, know it.

680. When you tell me that you cursed and meant n. As you did
so it is all one to me whether you looked at a picture of him, or
imagined him, uttered his name, or what. The conclusions from this
fact that interest me have nothing to do with these things. On
the other hand, however, someone might explain to me that cursing
was effective only when one had a clear image of the man or spoke his
name out loud. But we should not say the point is how the man
who is cursing means his victim.

681. Nor, of course, does one ask: are you sure that you cursed
him> that the connexion with him was established?

Then this connexion must be very easy to establish, if one can be
so sure of it? I can know that it doesnt fail of its object iwell, can
it happen to me, to intend to write to one person and in fact write
to another? And how might it happen?

682. You said, ttll stop soon. Were you thinking of the noise
or of your pain? If he answers i was thinking of the piano-tuning
is he observing that the connexion existed, or is he making it by means

philosophical investigations i

171c

of these words? Cant i say both} if what he said was true, didnt the
connexion existand is he not for all that making one which did not
exist?

683. I draw a head. You ask whom is that supposed to repre
sent? I: its supposed to be n. You: but it doesnt look like
him; if anything, its rather like m. When i said it represented n.
Was i establishing a connexion or reporting one? And what connexion
did exist?

684. What is there in favour of saying that my words describe an
existing connexion? Well, they relate to various things which didnt
simply make their appearance with the words. They say, for example,
that i should have given a particular answer then, if i had been asked.
And even if this is only conditional, still it does say something about
the past.

685. Look for a does not mean look for b; but i may do
just the same thing in obeying the two orders.

To say that something different must happen in the two cases
would be like saying that the propositions today is my birthday
and my birthday is on april 26th must refer to different days, because
they do not make the same sense.

686. Of course i meant b; i didnt think of a at alll

i wanted b to come to me, so as to . . All this points to a

wider context.

687. Instead of i meant him one can, of course, sometimes say
i thought of him; sometimes even yes, we were speaking of him.
Ask yourself what speaking of him consists in.

688. In certain circumstances one can say as i was speaking, i
felt i was saying it to you. But i should not say this if i were in any
case talking with you.

689. I am thinking of n. I am speaking of n.

How do i speak of him? I say, for instance, i must go and see n

today-but surely that is not enough! After all, when i say n

i might mean various people of this name. Then there must surely
be a further, different connexion between my talk and n, for otherwise
i should still not have meant him.

Certainly such a connexion exists. Only not as you imagine it:
namely by means of a mental mechanism.

(one compares meaning him with aiming at him. )

philosophical investigations i

172

690. What about the case where i at one time make an apparently
innocent remark and accompany it with a furtive sidelong glance at
someone; and at another time, without any such glance, speak of
somebody present openly, mentioning his nameam i really thinking
specially about him as i use his name?

691. When i make myself a sketch of ns face from memory, i
can surely be said to mean him by my drawing. But which of the
processes taking place while i draw (or before or afterwards) could i
call meaning him?

For one would naturally like to say: when he meant him, he aimed
at him. But how is anyone doing that, when he calls someone elses face
to mind?

I mean, how does he call him to mind?

How does he call him ?

692. Is it correct for someone to say: when i gave you this rule,

i meant you to. In this case? Even if he did not think of this

case at all as he gave the rule? Of course it is correct. For to mean it
did not mean: to think of it. But now the problem is: how are we
to judge whether someone meant such-and-such? The fact that he
has, for example, mastered a particular technique in arithmetic and
algebra, and that he taught someone else the expansion of a series in the
usual way, is such a criterion.

693. When i teach someone the formation of the series .... I
surely mean him to write .... At the hundredth place. Quite right;
you mean it. And evidently without necessarily even thinking of it.
This shews you how different the grammar of the verb to mean
is from that of to think. And nothing is more wrong-headed
than calling meaning a mental activity 1 unless, that is, one is setting
out to produce confusion. (it would also be possible to speak of an
activity of butter when it rises in price, and if no problems are
produced by this it is harmless. )

part ii

i

one can imagine an animal angry, frightened, unhappy, happy,
startled. But hopeful? And why not?

A dog believes his master is at the door. But can he also believe his
master will come the day after to-morrow? And what can he not do
here? How do i do it? How am i supposed to answer this?

Can only those hope, who can talk? Only those who have mastered
the use of a language. That is to say, the phenomena of hope are modes
of this complicated form of life. (if a concept refers to a character of
human handwriting, it has no application to beings that do not write. )

grief describes a pattern which recurs, with different variations,
in the weave of our life. If a mans bodily expression of sorrow and
of joy alternated, say with the ticking of a clock, here we should not
have the characteristic formation of the pattern of sorrow or of the
pattern of joy.

For a second he felt violent pain. Why does it sound queer
to say: for a second he felt deep grief? Only because it so seldom
happens?

But dont you feel grief now ? (but arent you playing chess now? "
the answer may be affirmative, but that does not make the concept
of grief any more like the concept of a sensation. The question
was really, of course, a temporal and personal one, not the logical
question which we wanted to raise.

I must tell you: i am frightened.

I must tell you: it makes me shiver.

And one can say this in a smiling tone of voice too.

And do you mean to tell me he doesnt feel it? How else does he
know it? But even when he says it as a piece of information he does
not learn it from his sensations.

For think of the sensations produced by physically shuddering:
the words it makes me shiver are themselves such a shuddering re
action; and if i hear and feel them as i utter them, this belongs among
the rest of those sensations. Now why should the wordless shudder
be the ground of the verbal one?

174 

in saying when i heard this word, it meant .... To me one
refers to a point of time and to a way of using the word\ (of course, it is
this combination that we fail to grasp. )

and the expression i was then going to say. Refers to a

point of time and to an action.

I speak of the essential references of the utterance in order to dis
tinguish them from other peculiarities of the expression we use. The
references that are essential to an utterance are the ones which would
make us translate some otherwise alien form of expression into this,
our customary form.

If you were unable to say that the word till could be both a verb
and a conjunction, or to construct sentences in which it was now the
one and now the other, you would not be able to manage simple
schoolroom exercises. But a schoolboy is not asked to conceive the
word in one way or another out of any context, or to report how he
has conceived it.

The words the rose is red are meaningless if the word is has the
meaning is identical with. Does this mean: if you say this sentence
and mean the is as the sign of identity, the sense disintegrates?

We take a sentence and tell someone the meaning of each of its
words; this tells him how to apply them and so how to apply the
sentence too. If we had chosen a senseless sequence of words instead
of the sentence, he would not learn how to apply the sequence . And if we
explain the word is as the sign of identity, then he does not learn
how to use the sentence the rose is red.

And yet there is something right about this disintegration of the
sense. You get it in the following example: one might tell someone:
if you want to pronounce the salutation hail! Expressively, you had
better not think of hailstones as you say it.

Experiencing a meaning and experiencing a mental image. In
both cases, we should like to say, we are experiencing something,
only something different. A different content is profferedis present
to consciousness. What is the content of the experience of imagin
ing? The answer is a picture, or a description. And what is the content

175 

176* philosophical investigations ilii

of the experience of meaning? I dont know what i am supposed to
say to this. If there is any sense in the above remark, it is that the
two concepts are related like those of red and blue; and that is wrong.

Can one keep hold of an understanding of meaning as one can keep
hold of a mental image? That is, if one meaning of a word suddenly
strikes me, can it also stay there in my mind?

The whole scheme presented itself to my mind in a flash and stayed
there like that for five minutes. Why does this sound odd? One
would like to think: what flashed on me and what stayed there in my
mind cant have been the same.

I exclaimed now i have it! A sudden start, and then i was able
to set the scheme forth in detail. What is supposed to have stayed
in this case? A picture, perhaps. But now i have it did not mean,
i have the picture.

If a meaning of a word has occurred to you and you have not for
gotten it again, you can now use the word in such-and-such a way.

If the meaning has occurred to you, now you know it, and the know
ing began when it occurred to you. Then how is it like an experience
of imagining something?

If i say mr. Scot is not a scot, i mean the first scot as a proper
name, the second one as a common name. Then do different things
have to go on in my mind at the first and second scot? (assuming
that i am not uttering the sentence parrot-wise. )try to mean the
first scot as a common name and the second one as a proper name.
How is it done? When i do it, i blink with the effort as i try to parade
the right meanings before my mind in saying the words. But do i
parade the meanings of the words before my mind when i make the
ordinary use of them?

When i say the sentence with this exchange of meanings i feel that
its sense disintegrates. Well, i feel it, but the person i am saying it to

does not. So what harm is done? -but the point is, when one

utters the sentence in the usual way something else, quite definite,
takes place. What takes place is not this parade of the meanings
before ones mind.

Iii

what makes my image of him into an image of him ?

Not its looking like him.

The same question applies to the expression i see him now vividly
before me as to the image. What makes this utterance into an utter
ance about him ? Nothing in it or simultaneous with it (behind it*).
If you want to know whom he meant, ask him.

(but it is also possible for a face to come before my mind, and even
for me to be able to draw it, without my knowing whose it is or
where i have seen it. )

suppose, however, that someone were to draw while he had an
image or instead of having it, though it were only with his finger in
the air. (this might be called motor imagery. ) he could be asked:
whom does that represent? And his answer would be decisive.
It is quite as if he had given a verbal description: and such a description
can also simply take the place of the image.

Iv

i believe that he is suffering. Do i also believe that he isnt
an automaton?

It would go against the grain to use the word in both connexions.

(or is it like this: i believe that he is suffering, but am certain that
he is not an automaton? Nonsense 1)

suppose i say of a friend: he isnt an automaton. What informa
tion is conveyed by this, and to whom would it be information? To
a human being who meets him in ordinary circumstances? What
information could it give him? (at the very most that this man always
behaves like a human being, and not occasionally like a machine. )

i believe that he is not an automaton, just like that, so far makes
no sense.

My attitude towards him is an attitude towards a soul. I am not of
the opinion that he has a soul.

Religion teaches that the soul can exist when the body has dis-
integrated. Now do i understand this teaching? Of course i under
stand it-1 can imagine plenty of things in connexion with it. And

havent pictures of these things been painted? And why should such
a picture be only an imperfect rendering of the spoken doctrine? Why
should it not do the same service as the words? And it is the service
which is the point.

If the picture of thought in the head can force itself upon us, then
why not much more that of thought in the soul?

The human body is the best picture of the human soul.

And how about such an expression as: in my heart i understood
when you said that, pointing to ones heart? Does one, perhaps, not
mean this gesture? Of course one means it. Or is one conscious of
using a mere figure? Indeed not. It is not a figure that we choose,
not a simile, yet it is a figurative expression.

178

v

suppose we were observing the movement of a point (for example,
a point of light on a screen). It might be possible to draw important
consequences of the most various kinds from the behaviour of this
point. And what a variety of observations can be made here! The
path of the point and certain of its characteristic measures (amplitude
and wave-length for instance), or the velocity and the law according
to which it varies, or the number or position of the places at which it
changes discontinuously, or the curvature of the path at these places,
and innumerable other things. Any of these features of its behaviour
might be the only one to interest us. We might, for example, be in
different to everything about its movements except for the number of
loops it made in a certain time. And if we were interested, not in just
one such feature, but in several, each might yield us special information,
different iii kind from all the rest. This is how it is with the behaviour
of man; with the different characteristic features which we observe in
this behaviour.

Then psychology treats of behaviour, not of the mind?

What do psychologists record? What do they observe? Isnt it
the behaviour of human beings, in particular their utterances? But
these are not about behaviour.

I noticed that he was out of humour. Is this a report about his
behaviour or his state of mind? (the sky looks threatening: is
this about the present or the future? ) both; not side-by-side, however,
but about the one via the other.

A doctor asks: how is he feeling? The nurse says: he is
groaning. A report on his behaviour. But need there be any question
for them whether the groaning is really genuine, is really the expression
of anything? Might they not, for example, draw the conclusion if he
groans, we must give him more analgesicwithout suppressing a
middle term? Isnt the point the service to which they put the descrip
tion of behaviour?

But then they make a tacit presupposition. Then what we do in
our language-game always rests on a tacit presupposition.

179 

philosophical investigations iiv

i8o

i describe a psychological experiment: the apparatus, the questions of
the experimenter, the actions and replies of the subjectand then i say
that it is a scene in a play. Now everything is different. So it will be
said: if this experiment were described in the same way in a book on
psychology, then the behaviour described would be understood as
the expression of something mental just because it is presupposed
that the subject is not taking us in, hasnt learnt the replies by heart,
and other things of the kind. So we are making a presupposition?

Should we ever really express ourselves like this: naturally i am

presupposing that. ? Or do we not do so only because the

other person already knows that?

Doesnt a presupposition imply a doubt? And doubt may be entirely
lacking. Doubting has an end.

It is like the relation: physical objectsense-impressions. Here we
have two different language-games and a complicated relation between
them. If you try to reduce their relations to a simple formula you go
wrong.

Vi

suppose someone said: every familiar word, in a book for example,
actually carries an atmosphere with it in our minds, a 'corona of
lightly indicated uses. Just as if each figure in a painting were
surrounded by delicate shadowy drawings of scenes, as it were in
another dimension, and in them we saw the figures in different con
texts. Only let us take this assumption seriously! Then we see that
it is not adequate to explain intention .

For if it is like this, if the possible uses of a word do float before us
in half-shades as we say or hear itthis simply goes for us . But we
communicate with other people without knowing if they have this
experience too.

How should we counter someone who told us that with him under
standing was an inner process? -how should we counter him if he

said that with him knowing how to play chess was an inner process?
We should say that when we want to know if he can play chess we
arent interested in anything that goes on inside him. And if he replies
that this is in fact just what we are interested in, that is, we are interested
in whether he can play chessthen we shall have to draw his attention
to the criteria which would demonstrate his capacity, and on the other
hand to the criteria for the 'inner states.

Even if someone had a particular capacity only when, and only as
long as, he had a particular feeling, the feeling would not be the
capacity.

The meaning of a word is not the experience one has in hearing or
saying it, and the sense of a sentence is not a complex of such ex
periences. (how do the meanings of the individual words make up
the sense of the sentence "i still havent seen him yet? ) the sentence
is composed of the words, and that is enough.

Thoughone would like to sayevery word has a different character
in different contexts, at the same time there is one character it always
has: a single physiognomy. It looks at us. But a face in a painting
looks at us too.

Are you sure that there is a single if-feeling, and not perhaps several?
Have you tried saying the word in a great variety of contexts? For

i8i e

philosophical investigations ilvi

l82

example, when it bears the principal stress of the sentence, and when
the word next to it does.

Suppose we found a man who, speaking of how words felt to him,
told us that if and but felt the same . Should we have the right
to disbelieve him? We might think it strange. He doesnt play our
game at all, one would like to say. Or even: this is a different
type of man.

If he used the words if and but as we do, shouldnt we think
he understood them as we do?

One misjudges the psychological interest of the if-feeling if one
regards it as the obvious correlate of a meaning; it needs rather to be
seen in a different context, in that of the special circumstances in which
it occurs.

Does a person never have the if-feeling when he is not uttering
the word if? Surely it is at least remarkable if this cause alone
produces this feeling. And this applies generally to the atmosphere
of a word; why does one regard it so much as a matter of course
that only this word has this atmosphere?

The if-feeling is not a feeling which accompanies the word if.

The if-feeling would have to be compared with the special feeling
which a musical phrase gives us. (one sometimes describes such a
feeling by saying here it is as if a conclusion were being drawn, or

i should like to say hence . , or here i should always like to

make a gesture and then one makes it. )

but can this feeling be separated from the phrase? And yet it is not
the phrase itself, for that can be heard without the feeling.

Is it in this respect like the expression with which the phrase is
played?

We say this passage gives us a quite special feeling. We sing it to
ourselves, and make a certain movement, and also perhaps have some
special sensation. But in a different context we should not recognize
these accompanimentsthe movement, the sensationat all. They are
quite empty except just when we are singing this passage.

Philosophical investigations hvi

i8$e

i sing it with a quite particular expression. This expression is
not something that can be separated from the passage. It is a different
concept. (a different game. )

the experience is this passage played like this (that is, as i am doing
it, for instance; a description could only hint at it).

Thus the atmosphere that is inseparable from its objectis not an
atmosphere.

Closely associated things, things which we have associated, seem to fit
one another. But what is this seeming to fit? How is their seeming to
fit manifested? Perhaps like this: we cannot imagine the man who had
this name, this face, this handwriting, not to have produced these works,
but perhaps quite different ones instead (those of another great man).

We cannot imagine it? Do we try?

Here is a possibility: i hear that someone is painting a picture
beethoven writing the ninth symphony. I could easily imagine the
kind of thing such a picture would shew us. But suppose someone
wanted to represent what goethe would have looked like writing the
ninth symphony? Here i could imagine nothing that would not be
embarrassing and ridiculous.

Vii

people who on waking tell us certain incidents (that they have been
in such-and-such places, etc. ). Then we teach them the expression
i dreamt, which precedes the narrative. Afterwards i sometimes
ask them did you dream anything last night? And am answered
yes or no, sometimes with an account of a dream, sometimes not. That
is the language-game. (i have assumed here that i do not dream myself.
But then, nor do i ever have the feeling of an invisible presence;
other people do, and i can question them about their experiences. )

now must i make some assumption about whether people are
deceived by their memories or not; whether they really had these
images while they slept, or whether it merely seems so to them on
waking? And what meaning has this question? And what interest?
Do we ever ask ourselves this when someone is telling us his dream?
And if notis it because we are sure his memory wont have deceived
him? (and suppose it were a man with a quite specially bad
memory? )

does this mean that it is nonsense ever to raise the question whether
dreams really take place during sleep, or are a memory phenomenon
of the awakened? It will turn on the use of the question.

The mind seems able to give a word meaningisnt this as if i
were to say the carbon atoms in benzene seem to lie at the comers of
a hexagon? But this is not something that seems to be so; it is a
picture.

The evolution of the higher animals and of man, and the awakening
of consciousness at a particular level. The picture is something like
this: though the ether is filled with vibrations the world is d&ik
but one day man opens his seeing eye, and there is light.

What this language primarily describes is a picture. What is to be
done with the picture, how it is to be used, is still obscure. Quite
clearly, however, it must be explored if we want to understand the
sense of what we are saying. But the picture seems to spare us
this work: it already points to a particular use. This is how it takes
us in.

184^

vui

my kinaesthetic sensations advise me of the movement and position
of my limbs.

I let my index finger make an easy pendulum movement of small
amplitude. I either hardly feel it, or dont feel it at all. Perhaps a
little in the tip of the finger, as a slight tension. (not at all in the
joint. ) and this sensation advises me of the movement? For i can
describe the movement exactly.

But after all, you must feel it, otherwise you wouldnt know
(without looking) how your finger was moving. But knowing
it only means: being able to describe it. I may be able to tell the direc
tion from which a sound comes only because it affects one ear more
strongly than the other, but i dont feel this in my ears; yet it has its
effect: i know the direction from which the sound comes; for instance,
i look in that direction.

It is the same with the idea that it must be some feature of our pain
that advises us of the whereabouts of the pain in the body, and some
feature of our memory image that tells us the time to which it belongs.

A sensation can advise us of the movement or position of a limb.
(for example, if you do not know, as a normal person does, whether
your arm is stretched out, you might find out by a piercing pain in the
elbow. )in the same way the character of a pain can tell us where
the injury is. (and the yellowness of a photograph how old it is. )

what is the criterion for my learning the shape and colour of an
object from a sense-impression?

What sense-impression? Well, this one; i use words or a picture to
describe it.

And now: what do you feel when your fingers are in this position?
How is one to define a feeling? It is something special and indefinable.
But it must be possible to teach the use of the words i

what i am looking for is the grammatical difference.

Let us leave the kinaesthetic feeling out for the moment. I want to
describe a feeling to someone, and i tell him do this , and then youll

185

i86e philosophical investigations eviii

get it, and i hold my arm or my head in a particular position. Now
is this a description of a feeling? And when shall i say that he has under
stood what feeling i meant? He will have to give a further description
of the feeling afterwards. And what kind of description must it be?

I say do this , and you'll get it". Can't there be a doubt here?
Mustn't there be one, if it is a feeling that is meant?

This looks so; this tastes so; this feels so . This" and so must be
differendy explained.

Our interest in a feeling' is of a quite particular kind. It includes,
for instance, the degree of the feeling', its place', and the extent to
which one feeling can be submerged by another. (when a movement
is very painful, so that the pain submerges every other slight sensation
in the same place, does this make it uncertain whether you have really
made this movement? Could it lead you to find out by looking? )

ix

if you observe your own grief, which senses do you use to observe
it? A particular sense; one that feels grief? Then do you feel it differently
when you are observing it? And what is the grief that you are observ
ingis it one which is there only while it is being observed?

Observing" does not produce what is observed. (that is a concep
tual statement. )

again: i do not observe" what only comes into being through
observation. The object of observation is something else.

A touch which was still painful yesterday is no longer so today.

Today i feel the pain only when i think about it. (that is: in certain
circumstances. )

my grief is no longer the same; a memory which was still unbear
able to me a year ago is now no longer so.

That is a result of observation.

When do we say that any one is observing? Roughly: when he
puts, himself in a favourable position to receive certain impressions in
order (for example) to describe what they tell him.

If you trained someone to emit a particular sound at the sight of
something red, another at the sight of something yellow, and so on
for other colours, still he would not yet be describing objects by
their colours. Though he might be a help to us in giving a descrip
tion. A description is a representation of a distribution in a space (in
that of time, for instance).

If i let my gaze wander round a room and suddenly it lights on
an object of a striking red colour, and i say red! ""that is not a
description.

Are the words i am afraid" a description of a state of mind?

I say i am afraid; someone else asks me: what was that? A cry
of fear; or do you want to tell me how you feel; or is it a reflection on
your present state? "could i always give him a clear answer? Could
i never give him one?

187c

188 e philosophical investigations ilix

we can imagine all sorts of things here, for example:

no, no! I am afraid!

I am afraid. I am sorry to have to confess it.

I am still a bit afraid, but no longer as much as before.

At bottom i am still afraid, though i wont confess it to myself.

I torment myself with all sorts of fears.

Now, just when i should be fearless, i am afraid!

To each of these sentences a special tone of voice is appropriate,
and a different context.

It would be possible to imagine people who as it were thought much
more definitely than we, and used different words where we use only
one.

We ask what does t am frightened really mean, what am i
referring to when i say it? And of course we find no answer, or
one that is inadequate.

The question is: in what sort of context does it occur?

I can find no answer if i try to settle the question what am i
referring to? What am i thinking when i say it? By repeating the
expression of fear and at the same time attending to myself, as it were
observing my soul out of the corner of my eye. In a concrete case
i can indeed ask why did i say that, what did i mean by it?
And i might answer the question too; but not on the ground of observ
ing what accompanied the speaking. And my answer would supple
ment, paraphrase, the earlier utterance.

What is fear? What does being afraid mean? If i wanted to define
it at a single shewingi should play-act fear.

Could i also represent hope in this way? Hardly. And what about
belief?

Describing my state of mind (of fear, say) is something i do in a
particular context. (just as it takes a particular context to make a
certain action into an experiment. )

is it, then, so surprising that i use the same expression in different
games? And sometimes as it were between the games?

And do i always talk with very definite purpose? And is what i say
meaningless because i dont?

Philosophical investigations ilix ,8 9 e

when it is said in a funeral oration we mourn our.... This is
surely supposed to be an expression of mourning; not to tell anything
to those who are present. But in a prayer at the grave these words
would in a way be used to tell someone something.

But here is the problem: a cry, which cannot be called a description,
which is more primitive than any description, for all that serves as a
description of the inner life.

A cry is not a description. But there are transitions. And the words
i am afraid may approximate more, or less, to being a cry. They may
come quite close to this and also be far removed from it.

We surely do not always say someone is complaining, because he
says he is in pain. So the words i am in pain may be a cry of com
plaint, and may be something else.

But if i am afraid is not always something like a cry of complaint
and yet sometimes is, then why should it always be a description of a
state of mind?

X

how did we ever come to use such an expression as i believe ... ?
Did we at some time become aware of a phenomenon (of belief)?

Did we observe ourselves and other people and so discover belief?

Moores paradox can be put like this: the expression i believe that
this is the case is used like the assertion this is the case; and yet the
hypothesis that i believe this is the case is not used like the hypothesis
that this is the case.

So it looks as if the assertion i believe were not the assertion of
what is supposed in the hypothesis i believe!

Similarly: the statement i believe its going to rain has a meaning
like, that is to say a use like, its going to rain, but the meaning of
i believed then that it was going to rain, is not like that of it did
rain then.

But surely t believed must tell of just the same thing in the past
as t believe in the present! Surely i must mean just the same in

relation to  i, as ^/itmeans in relation to i! This means nothing at all.

At bottom, when i say t believe.. I am describing my own
state of mindbut this description is indirectly an assertion of the
fact believed. As in certain circumstances i describe a photograph
in order to describe the thing it is a photograph of.

But then i must also be able to say that the photograph is a good
one. So here too: i believe its raining and my belief is reliable, so i
have confidence in it. In that case my belief would be a kind of
sense-impression.

One can mistrust ones own senses, but not ones own belief.

If there were a verb meaning to believe falsely, it would not have
any significant first person present indicative.

Dont look at it as a matter of course, but as a most remarkable
thing, that the verbs believe, wish, will display all the inflexions
possessed by cut, chew, run.

The language-game of reporting can be given such a turn that a
report is not meant to inform the hearer about its subject matter but
about the person making the report.

190*

philosophical investigations hx i 9 ie

it is so when, for instance, a teacher examines a pupil. (you can
measure to test the ruler. )

suppose i were to introduce some expressioni believe, for
instancein this way: it is to be prefixed to reports when they serve
to give information about the reporter. (so the expression need not
carry with it any suggestion of uncertainty. Remember that the uncer
tainty of an assertion can be expressed impersonally: he might come
today. )i believe .... , and it isnt so would be a contradiction.

I believe.... Throws light on my state. Conclusions about my
conduct can be drawn from this expression. So there is a similarity
here to expressions of emotion, of mood, etc..

If, however, i believe it is so throws light on my state, then so
does the assertion it is so. For the sign i believe cant do it, can
at the most hint at it.

Imagine a language in which i believe it is so is expressed only
by means of the tone of the assertion it is so. In this language they
say, not he believes but he is inclined to say.... And there
exists also the hypothetical (subjunctive) suppose i were inclined
etc. , but not the expression i am inclined to say.

Moores paradox would not exist in this language; instead of it,
however, there would be a verb lacking one inflexion.

But this ought not to surprise us. Think of the fact that one can
predict ones own future action by an expression of intention.

I say of someone else he seems to believe .... And other people
say it of me. Now, why do i never say it of myself, not even when
others rightly say it of me? Do i myself not see and hear myself,
then? That can be said.

One feels conviction within oneself, one doesnt infer it from ones
own words or their tone. What is true here is: one does not infer
ones own conviction from ones own words; nor yet the actions
which arise from that conviction.

Here it looks as if the assertion i believe were not the assertion of
what is supposed in the hypothesis. So i am tempted to look for a
different development of the verb in the first person present indicative.

This is how i think of it: believing is a state of mind. It has duration;
and that independently of the duration of its expression in a sentence,
for example. So it is a kind of disposition of the believing person.
This is shewn me in the case of someone else by his behaviour; and

i 92 e philosophical investigations iix

by his words. And under this head, by the expression i believe .. .
As well as by the simple assertion. What about my own case: how do i
myself recognize my own disposition? Here it will have been necessary
for me to take notice of myself as others do, to listen to myself talking,
to be able to draw conclusions from what i sayl

my own relation to my words is wholly different from other peoples.

That different development of the verb would have been possible,
if only i could say i seem to believe.

If i listened to the words of my mouth, i might say that someone
else was speaking out of my mouth.

Judging from what i say, this is what i believe. Now, it is possible
to think out circumstances in which these words would make sense.

And then it would also be possible for someone to say it is raining
and i dont believe it, or it seems to me that my ego believes this,
but it isnt true. One would have to fill out the picture with behaviour
indicating that two people were speaking through my mouth.

Even in the hypothesis the pattern is not what you think.

When you say suppose i believe .... You are presupposing the
whole grammar of the word to believe, the ordinary use, of which
you are master. You are not supposing some state of affairs which,
so to speak, a picture presents unambiguously to you, so that you can
tack on to this hypothetical use some assertive use other than the
ordinary one. You would not know at all what you were supposing
here (i. E. What, for example, would follow from such a supposition),
if you were not already familiar with the use of believe.

Think of the expression i say .... , for example in i say it will
rain today, which simply comes to the same thing as the assertion
it will.. ... He says it will. ... Means approximately he
believes it will..... Suppose i say .... Does not mean: suppose
it rains today.

Different concepts touch here and coincide over a stretch. But
you need not think that all lines are circles .

Consider the misbegotten sentence it may be raining, but it isnt.

And here one should be on ones guard against saying that it
may be raining really means i think itll be raining. For why not
the other way round, why should not the latter mean the former?

Dont regard a hesitant assertion as an assertion of hesitancy.

Xi

two uses of the word see.

The one: what do you see there? I see this  (and then a descrip
tion, a drawing, a copy). The other: i see a likeness between these
two faceslet the man i tell this to be seeing the faces as clearly as i
do myself.

The importance of this is the difference of category between the two
objects* of sight.

The one man might make an accurate drawing of the two faces,
and the other notice in the drawing the likeness which the former did
not see.

I contemplate a face, and then suddenly notice its likeness to an
other. I see that it has not changed; and yet i see it differently. I call
this experience noticing an aspect.

Its causes are of interest to psychologists.

We are interested in the concept and its place among the concepts of
experience.

You could imagine the illustration

appearing in several places in a book, a text-book for instance. In the
relevant text something different is in question every time: here a glass
cube, there an inverted open box, there a wire frame of that shape,
there three boards forming a solid angle. Each time the text supplies
the interpretation of the illustration.

But we can also see the illustration now as one thing now as another.
So we interpret it, and see it as we interpret it.

Here perhaps we should like to reply: the description of what is
got immediately, i. E. Of the visual experience, by means of an inter
pretationis an indirect description. I see the figure as a box
means: i have a particular visual experience which i have found that
i always have when i interpret the figure as a box or when i look at

x 93 e

philosophical investigations ilxi

i 94 e

a box. But if it meant this i ought to know it. I ought to be
able to refer to the experience directly, and not only indirectly. (as
i can speak of red without calling it the colour of blood. )

i shall call the following figure, derived from jastrow 1 , the duck-
rabbit. It can be seen as a rabbits head or as a ducks.

And i must distinguish between the continuous seeing of an aspect
and the dawning of an aspect.

The picture might have been shewn me, and i never have seen
anything but a rabbit in it.

Here it is useful to introduce the idea of a picture-object. For
instance

would be a picture-face.

In some respects i stand towards it as i do towards a human face.
I can study its expression, can react to it as to the expression of the
human face. A child can talk to picture-men or picture-animals, can
treat them as it treats dolls.

I may, then, have seen the duck-rabbit simply as a picture-rabbit
from the first. That is to say, if asked whats that? Or what do
you see here? I should have replied: a picture-rabbit. If i had
further been asked what that was, i should have explained by pointing
to all sorts of pictures of rabbits, should perhaps have pointed to real
rabbits, talked about their habits, or given an imitation of them.

I should not have answered the question what do you see here?
By saying: now i am seeing it as a picture-rabbit. I should simply

1 fact and fable in psychology.

Philosophical investigations ilxi f 9 $e

have described my perception: just as if i had said i see a red circle
over there.

Nevertheless someone else could have said of me: "he is seeing the
figure as a picture-rabbit.

It would have made as little sense for me to say "now i am seeing
it as ...  As to say at the sight of a knife and fork "now i am seeing
this as a knife and fork. This expression would not be understood.
Any more than: "now its a fork or it can be a fork too.

One doesnt * take  what one knows as the cutlery at a meal for
cutlery; any more than one ordinarily tries to move ones mouth as
one eats, or aims at moving it.

If you say "now its a face for me, we can ask: "what change are
you alluding to?

I see two pictures, with the duck-rabbit surrounded by rabbits in
one, by ducks in the other. I do not notice that they are the same.
Does it follow from this that i see something different in the two cases?
It gives us a reason for using this expression here.

"i saw it quite differently, i should never have recognized it i
now, that is an exclamation. And there is also a justification for it.

I should never have thought of superimposing the heads like that,
of making this comparison between them. For they suggest a different
mode of comparison.

Nor has the head seen like this the slightest similarity to the head
seen like this -although they are congruent.

I am shewn a picture-rabbit and asked what it is; i say "its a rabbit.
Not "now its a rabbit. I am reporting my perception. I am shewn
the duck-rabbit and asked what it is; i may say "its a duck-rabbit.
But i may also react to the question quite differently. The answer
that it is a duck-rabbit is again the report of a perception; the answer
"now its a rabbit is not. Had i replied "its a rabbit, the ambiguity
would have escaped me, and i should have been reporting my per
ception.

The change of aspect. "but surely you would say that the picture
is altogether different now!

But what is different: my impression? My point of view? Can i
say? I describe the alteration like a perception; quite as if the object
had altered before my eyes.

Philosophical investigations ilxi

196

now i am seeing this, i might say (pointing to another picture, for
example). This has the form of a report of a new perception.

The expression of a change of aspect is the expression of a new
perception and at the same time of the perceptions being unchanged.

I suddenly see the solution of a puzzle-picture. Before, there were
branches there; now there is a human shape. My visual impression
has changed and now i recognize that it has not only shape and colour
but also a quite particular organization. My visual impression has
changed; what was it like before and what is it like now? If i
represent it by means of an exact copyand isnt that a good repre
sentation of it? No change is shewn.

And above all do not say after all my visual impression isnt the

drawing, it is this -which i cant shew to anyone. Of course it is

not the drawing, but neither is it anything of the same category,
which i carry within myself.

The concept of the inner picture is misleading, for this concept
uses the < outer picture as a model; and yet the uses of the words for
these concepts are no more like one another than the uses of numeral
and number. (and if one chose to call numbers ideal numerals, one
might produce a similar confusion. )

if you put the organization of a visual impression on a level with
colours and shapes, you are proceeding from the idea of the visual
impression as an inner object. Of course this makes this object into a
chimera; a queerly shifting construction. For the similarity to a picture
is now impaired.

If i know that the schematic cube has various aspects and i want to
find out what someone else sees, i can get him to make a model of
what he sees, in addition to a copy, or to point to such a model; even
though he has no idea of my purpose in demanding two accounts.

But when we have a changing aspect the case is altered. Now the
only possible expression of our experience is what before perhaps
seemed, or even was, a useless specification when once we had the
copy.

And this by itself wrecks the comparison of organization with
colour and shape in visual impressions.

If i saw the duck-rabbit as a rabbit, then i saw: these shapes and
colours (i give them in detail)and i saw besides something like this:

philosophical investigations ilri 197

and here i point to a number of different pictures of rabbits. This
shews the difference between the concepts.

Seeing as .... Is not part of perception. And for that reason it is
like seeing and again not like.

I look at an animal and am asked: what do you see? I answer:
a rabbit. I see a landscape; suddenly a rabbit runs past. I exclaim
a rabbit!

Both things, both the report and the exclamation, are expressions of
perception and of visual experience. But the exclamation is so in a
different sense from the report: it is forced from us. It is related to the
experience as a cry is to pain.

But since it is the description of a perception, it can also be called the

expression of thought. -if you are looking at the object, you need

not think of it; but if you are having the visual experience expressed by
the exclamation, you are also thinking of what you see.

Hence the flashing of an aspect on us seems half visual experience,
half thought.

Someone suddenly sees an appearance which he does not recognize
(it may be a familiar object, but in an unusual position or lighting); the
lack of recognition perhaps lasts only a few seconds. Is it correct to say
he has a different visual experience from someone who knew the
object at once?

For might not someone be able to describe an unfamiliar shape
that appeared before him just as accurately as i, to whom it is familiar?
And isnt that the answer? Of course it will not generally be so.
And his description will run quite differently. (i say, for example,
the animal had long earshe: there were two long appendages,
and then he draws them. )

i meet someone whom i have not seen for years; i see him clearly,
but fail to know him. Suddenly i know him, i see the old face in the
altered one. I believe that i should do a different portrait of him now
if i could paint.

Now, when i know my acquaintance in a crowd, perhaps after
looking in his direction for quite a while, is this a special sort of
seeing? Is it a case of both seeing and thinking? Or an amalgam of the
two, as i should almost like to say?

The question is: why does one want to say this?

Philosophical investigations hxi

198'

the very expression which is also a report of what is seen, is here
a cry of recognition.

What is the criterion of the visual experience? The criterion?
What do you suppose?

The representation of what is seen 5 .

The concept of a representation of what is seen, like that of a copy,
is very elastic, and so together with it is the concept of what is seen.
The two are intimately connected. (which is not to say that they are
alike. )

how does one tell that human beings see three-dimensionally?
I ask someone about the lie of the land (over there) of which he has a
view. Is it like this? " (i shew him with my hand)yes. How
do you know? Its not misty, i see it quite clear. He does not
give reasons for the surmise. The only thing that is natural to us
is to represent what we see three-dimensionally; special practice and
training are needed for two-dimensional representation whether in
drawing or in words. (the queemess of children's drawings. )

if someone sees a smile and does not know it for a smile, does not
understand it as such, does he see it differently from someone who
understands it? He mimics it differently, for instance.

Hold the drawing of a face upside down and you can't recognize
the expression of the face. Perhaps you can see that it is smiling, but
not exactly what kind of smile it is. You cannot imitate the smile or
describe it more exactly.

And yet the picture which you have turned round may be a most
exact representation of a person's face.

The figure (a) v j is the reverse of the figure (b)

as ( c ) is the reverse of ( d ) s^ea&ure

buti should like to saythere is a different difference between my
impressions of (c) and (d) and between those of (a) and (b). (d),
for example, looks neater than (c). (compare a remark of lewis
carroll's. ) (d) is easy, (c) hard to copy.

Philosophical investigations hri 199*

imagine the duck-rabbit hidden in a tangle of lines. Now i suddenly
notice it in the picture, and notice it simply as the head of a rabbit.
At some later time i look at the same picture and notice the same
figure, but see it as the duck, without necessarily realizing that it was
the same figure both times. If i later see the aspect changecan i say
that the duck and rabbit aspects are now seen quite differently from
when i recognized them separately in the tangle of lines? No.

But the change produces a surprise not produced by the recog
nition.

If you search in a figure (1) for another figure (2), and then find it,
you see (1) in a new way. Not only can you give a new kind of descrip
tion of it, but noticing the second figure was a new visual experience.

But you would not necessarily want to say figure (1) looks quite
different now; it isnt even in the least like the figure i saw before,
though they are congruent!

There are here hugely many interrelated phenomena and possible
concepts.

Then is the copy of the figure an incomplete description of my visual
experience? No. But the circumstances decide whether, and what,
more detailed specifications are necessary. It may be an incomplete
description; if there is still something to ask.

Of course we can say: there are certain things which fall equally
under the concept picture-rabbit and under the concept picture-
duck. And a picture, a drawing, is such a thing. But the impression
is not simultaneously of a picture-duck and a picture-rabbit.

What i really see must surely be what is produced in me by the
influence of the objectthen what is produced in me is a sort of
copy, something that in its turn can be looked at, can be before
one; almost something like a materialisation.

And this materialization is something spatial and it must be possible
to describe it in purely spatial terms. For instance (if it is a face)
it can smile; the concept of friendliness, however, has no place in an
account of it, but is foreign to such an account (even though it may
subserve it).

If you ask me what i saw, perhaps i shall be able to make a sketch
which shews you; but i shall mostly have no recollection of the way
my glance shifted in looking at it.

200 

philosophical investigations ilxi

the concept of seeing makes a tangled impression. Well, it is
tangled. I look at the landscape, my gaze ranges over it, i see
all sorts of distinct and indistinct movement; this impresses itself
sharply on me, that is quite hazy. After all, how completely ragged
what we see can appear 1 and now look at all that can be meant by
description of what is seen. But this just is what is called descrip
tion of what is seen. There is not one genuine proper case of such
descriptionthe rest being just vague, something which awaits
clarification, or which must just be swept aside as rubbish.

Here we are in enormous danger of wanting to make fine distinc
tions. It is the same when one tries to define the concept of a material
object in terms of what is really seen. What we have rather to do is
to accept the everyday language-game, and to note false accounts of
the matter as false. The primitive language-game which children are
taught needs no justification; attempts at justification need to be
rejected.

Take as an example the aspects of a triangle. This triangle

can be seen as a triangular hole, as a solid, as a geometrical drawing;
as standing on its base, as hanging from its apex; as a mountain,
as a wedge, as an arrow or pointer, as an overturned object which is
meant to stand on the shorter side of the right angle, as a half parallel
ogram, and as various other things.

You can think now of this now of this as you look at it, can regard
it now as this now as this, and then you will see it now this way, now
this. "what way? There is no further qualification.

But how is it possible to see an object according to an interpretation ?
The question represents it as a queer fact; as if something were being
forced into a form it did not really fit. But no squeezing, no forcing
took place here.

When it looks as if there were no room for such a form between
other ones you have to look for it in another dimension. If there is
no room here, there is room in another dimension.

Philosophical investigations hxi 2 oie

(it is in this sense too that there is no room for imaginary numbers
in the continuum of real numbers. But what this means is: the applica
tion of the concept of imaginary numbers is less like that of real
numbers than appears from the look of the calculations . It is necessary
to get down to the application, and then the concept finds a different
place, one which, so to speak, one never dreamed of. )

how would the following account do: what i can see something
as, is what it can be a picture of?

What this means is: the aspects in a change of aspects are those
ones which the figure might sometimes have permanently in a picture.

A triangle can really be standing up in one picture, be hanging in
another, and can in a third be something that has fallen over. That is,
i who am looking at it say, not it may also be something that has
fallen over, but that glass has fallen over and is lying there in
fragments. This is how we react to the picture.

Could i say what a picture must be like to produce this effect?
No. There are, for example, styles of painting which do not convey
anything to me in this immediate way, but do to other people. I
think custom and upbringing have a hand in this.

What does it mean to say that i see the sphere floating in the air 9 in a
picture?

Is it enough that this description is the first to hand, is the matter-
of-course one? No, for it might be so for various reasons. This might,
for instance, simply be the conventional description.

What is the expression of my not merely understanding the picture in
this way, for instance, (knowing what it is supposed to be), but seeing
it in this way? It is expressed by: the sphere seems to float, you
see it floating, - or again, in a special tone of voice, it floats!

This, then, is the expression of taking something for something.
But not being used as such.

Here we are not asking ourselves what are the causes and what
produces this impression in a particular case.

And is it a special impression? Surely i see something different
when i see the sphere floating from when i merely see it lying there.
This really means: this expression is justified 1 (for taken literally
it is no more than a repetition. )

20z e

philosophical investigations ilxi

(and yet my impression is not that of a real floating sphere either.
There are various forms of three-dimensional seeing. The three-
dimensional character of a photograph and the three-dimensional
character of what we see through a stereoscope. )

and is it really a different impression? In order to answer this
i should like to ask myself whether there is really something different

there in me. But how can i find out? - 1 describe what i am seeing

differently.

Certain drawings are always seen as flat figures, and others some
times, or always, three-dimensionally.

Here one would now like to say: the visual impression of what is
seen three-dimensionally is three-dimensional; with the schematic cube,
for instance, it is a cube. (for the description of the impression is
the description of a cube. )

and then it seems queer that with some drawings our impression
should be a flat thing, and with some a three-dimensional thing. One
asks oneself where is this going to end?

When i see the picture of a galloping horsedo i merely know that
this is the kind of movement meant? Is it superstition to think i see

the horse galloping in the picture? -and does my visual impression

gallop too?

What does anyone tell me by saying now i see it as. ?

What consequences has this information? What can i do with it?

People often associate colours with vowels. Someone might find
that a vowel changed its colour when it was repeated over and over
again. He finds a now bluenow red, for instance.

The expression now i am seeing it as ... Might have no more
significance for us than: now i find a red.

(linked with physiological observations, even this change might
acquire importance for us. )

here it occurs to me that in conversation on aesthetic matters we
use the words: you have to see it like this, this is how it is meant;
when you see it like this, you see where it goes wrong; you have
to hear this bar as an introduction; you must hear it in this key;
you must phrase it like this (which can refer to hearing as well as to
playing).

Philosophical investigations hxi

203*

this figure a

is supposed to represent a convex step and to be used in some kind
of topological demonstration. For this purpose we draw the straight
line a through the geometric centres of the two surfaces. Now if
anyones three-dimensional impression of the figure were never more
than momentary, and even so were now concave, now convex, that
might make it difficult for him to follow our demonstration. And
if he finds that the flat aspect alternates with a three-dimensional one,
that is just as if i were to shew him completely different objects in
the course of the demonstration.

What does it mean for me to look at a drawing in descriptive
geometry and say: i know that this line appears again here, but i
cant see it like that? Does it simply mean a lack of familiarity in
operating with the drawing; that i dont know my way about too
well? This familiarity is certainly one of our criteria. What tells
us that someone is seeing the drawing three-dimensionally is a certain
kind of knowing ones way about. Certain gestures, for instance,
which indicate the three-dimensional relations: fine shades of behaviour.

I see that an animal in a picture is transfixed by an arrow. It has
struck it in the throat and sticks out at the back of the neck. Let the
picture be a silhouette. Do you see the arrowor do you merely know
that these two bits are supposed to represent part of an arrow?

(compare kohlers figure of the interpenetrating hexagons. )

but this isnt seeing \-but this is seeing 1it must be possible

to give both remarks a conceptual justification.

But this is seeing i in what sense is it seeing?

The phenomenon is at first surprising, but a physiological explana
tion of it will certainly be found.

Our problem is not a causal but a conceptual one.

If the picture of the transfixed beast or of the interpenetrating
hexagons were shewn to me just for a moment and then i had to
describe it, that would be my description; if i had to draw it i should

204 e

philosophical investigations ilxi

certainly produce a very faulty copy, but it would shew some sort of
animal transfixed by an arrow, or two hexagons interpenetrating. That
is to say: there are certain mistakes that i should not make.

The first thing to jump to my eye in this picture is: there are two
hexagons.

Now i look at them and ask myself: do i really see them as hexa
gons? And for the whole time they are before my eyes? (assuming
that they have not changed their aspect in that time. )and i should
like to reply: i am not thinking of them as hexagons the whole time.

Someone tells me: i saw it at once as two hexagons. And thats
the whole of what i saw. But how do i understand this? I think he
would have given this description at once in answer to the question
what are you seeing? , nor would he have treated it as one among
several possibilities. In this his description is like the answer a face
on being shewn the figure

the best description i can give of what was shewn me for a moment
is this :.

The impression was that of a rearing animal. So a perfectly
definite description came out. Was it seeing, or was it a thought?

Do not try to analyse your own inner experience.

Of course i might also have seen the picture first as something
different, and then have said to myself oh, its two hexagons!
So the aspect would have altered. And does this prove that i in fact
saw it as something definite?

Is it a genuine visual experience? The question is: in what sense
is it one?

Here it is difficult to see that what is at issue is the fixing of conce pts.

A concept forces itself on one. (this is what you must not forget. )

for when should i call it a mere case of knowing, not seeing?
Perhaps when someone treats the picture as a working drawing,
reads it like a blueprint. (fine shades of behaviour. Why are they
important ? They have important consequences. )

philosophical investigations ilxi

20j

to me it is an animal pierced by an arrow. That is what i treat
it as; this is my attitude to the figure. This is one meaning in calling it
a case of seeing.

But can i say in the same sense: to me these are two hexagons?
Not in the same sense, but in a similar one.

You need to think of the role which pictures such as paintings (as
opposed to working drawings) have in our lives. This role is by no
means a uniform one.

A comparison: texts are sometimes hung on the wall. But not
theorems of mechanics. (our relation to these two things. )

if you see the drawing as such-and-such an animal, what i expect
from you will be pretty different from what i expect when you merely
know what it is meant to be.

Perhaps the following expression would have been better: we
regard the photograph, the picture on our wall, as the object itself
(the man, landscape, and so on) depicted there.

This need not have been so. We could easily imagine people who
did not have this relation to such pictures. Who, for example, would
be repelled by photographs, because a face without colour and even
perhaps a face reduced in scale struck them as inhuman.

I say: we regard a portrait as a human being, but when do we do
so, and for how long? Always , if we see it at all (and do not, say, see it
as something else)?

I might say yes to this, and that would determine the concept of
regarding-as. The question is whether yet another concept, related
to this one, is also of importance to us: that, namely, of a seeing-as
which only takes place while i am actually concerning myself with the
picture as the object depicted.

I might say: a picture does not always live for me while i am seeing it.

Her picture smiles down on me from the wall. It need not always
do so, whenever my glance lights on it.

The duck-rabbit. One asks oneself: how can the eyethis dot 
be looking in a direction? See, it is jookingl (and one looks one
self as one says this. ) but one does not say and do this the whole time
one is looking at the picture. And now, what is this see, its looking!
Does it express a sensation?

Philosophical investigations hxi

2o6 c

(in giving all these examples i am not aiming at some kind of
completeness, some classification of psychological concepts. They are
only meant to enable the reader to shift for himself when he encounters
conceptual difficulties. )

now i see it as a .... Goes with i am trying to see it as a ...
Or i cant see it as a.... Yet. But i cannot try to see a conventional
picture of a lion as a lion, any more than an f as that letter. (though
i may well try to see it as a gallows, for example. )

do not ask yourself how does it work with /we? Ask what do i
know about someone else?

How does one play the game: it could be this too? (what a figure
could also bewhich is what it can be seen asis not simply another

figure. If someone said i see as

he might still be meaning very different things. )

here is a game played by children: they say that a chest, for example,
is a house; and thereupon it is interpreted as a house in every detail.
A piece of fancy is worked into it.

And does the child now see the chest as a house?

He quite forgets that it is a chest; for him it actually is a house.
(there are definite tokens of this. ) then would it not also be
correct to say he sees it as a house?

And if you knew how to play this game, and, given a particular
situation, you exclaimed with special expression now its a house!
You would be giving expression to the dawning of an aspect.

If i heard someone talking about the duck-rabbit, and now he spoke
in a certain way about the special expression of die rabbits face i
should say, now hes seeing the picture as a rabbit.

But the expression in ones voice and gestures is the same as if the
object had altered and had ended by becoming this or that.

I have a theme played to me several times and each time in a slower
tempo. In the end i say now its right, or now at last its a march,
now at last its a dance. The same tone of voice expresses the
dawning of an aspect.

Philosophical investigations hxi

207 c

fine shades of behaviour/when my understanding of a theme is
expressed by my whistling it with the correct expression, this is an
example of such fine shades.

The aspects of the triangle: it is as if an image came into contact,
and for a time remained in contact, with the visual impression.

In this, however, these aspects differ from the concave and convex
aspects of the step (for example). And also from the aspects of the
figure

(which i shall call a double cross) as a white cross on a black
ground and as a black cross on a white ground.

You must remember that the descriptions of the alternating aspects
are of a different kind in each case.

(the temptation to say i see it like this, pointing to the same thing
for it and this. ) always get rid of the idea of the private object
in this way: assume that it constantly changes, but that you do not
notice the change because your memory constantly deceives you.

Those two aspects of the double cross (i shall call them the aspects
a) might be reported simply by pointing alternately to an isolated
white and an isolated black cross.

One could quite well imagine this as a primitive reaction in a child
even before it could talk.

(thus in reporting the aspects a we point to a part of the double
cross. The duck and rabbit aspects could not be described in an
analogous way. )

you only see the duck and rabbit aspects if you are already conver
sant with the shapes of those two animals. There is no analogous con
dition for seeing the aspects a.

It is possible to take the duck-rabbit simply for the picture of a
rabbit, the double cross simply for the picture of a black cross, but not
to take the bare triangular figure for the picture of an object that has
fallen over. To see this aspect of the triangle demands imagination .

208 e

philosophical investigations ilxi

the aspects a are not essentially three-dimensional; a black cross
on a white ground is not essentially a cross with a white surface in the
background. You could teach someone the idea of the black cross on
a ground of different colour without shewing him anything but crosses
painted on sheets of paper. Here the background is simply the
surrounding of the cross.

The aspects a are not connected with the possibility of illusion
in the same way as are the three-dimensional aspects of the drawing of
a cube or step.

I can see the schematic cube as a box; but can i also see it now as a
paper, now as a tin, box? What ought i to say, if someone assured me
he could? I can set a limit to the concept here.

Yet think of the expression felt in connexion with looking at a
picture. (one feels the softness of that material. ) (knowing in dreams.
And i knew that . . . Was in the room. )

how does one teach a child (say in arithmetic) now take these
things together! Or. Now these go together? Clearly taking
together and going together must originally have had another
meaning for him than that of seeing in this way or that. And this is a
remark about concepts, not about teaching methods.

One kind of aspect might be called aspects of organization. When
the aspect changes parts of the picture go together which before did
not.

In the triangle i can see now this as apex, that as basenow this as
apex, that as base. Clearly the words now i am seeing this as the
apex cannot so far mean anything to a learner who has only just
met the concepts of apex, base, and so on. But i do not mean this
as an empirical proposition.

Now hes seeing it like this , now like that  would only be said of
someone capable of making certain applications of the figure quite
freely.

The substratum of this experience is the mastery of a technique.

But how queer for this to be the logical condition of someones
having such-and-such an experience\ after all, you dont say that one
only has toothache if one is capable of doing such-and-such. From
this it follows that we cannot be dealing with the same concept of
experience here. It is a different though related concept.

Philosophical investigations hxi

209 e

it is only if someone can do, has learnt, is master of, such-and-such,
that it makes sense to say he has had this experience.

And if this sounds crazy, you need to reflect that the concept of seeing
is modified here. (a similar consideration is often necessary to get
rid of a feeling of dizziness in mathematics. )

we talk, we utter words, and only later get a picture of their life.

For how could i see that this posture was hesitant before i knew
that it was a posture and not the anatomy of the animal?

But surely that only means that i cannot use this concept to describe
the object of sight, just because it has more than purely visual reference? ^
might i not for all that have a purely visual concept of a hesitant
posture, or of a timid face?

Such a concept would be comparable with major and minor which
certainly have emotional value, but can also be used purely to describe
a perceived structure.

The epithet sad, as applied for example to the outline face,
characterizes the grouping of lines in a circle. Applied to a human
being it has a different (though related) meaning. (but this does not
mean that a sad expression is like the feeling of sadness! )

think of this too: i can only see, not hear, red and green, but
sadness i can hear as much as i can see it.

Think of the expression i heard a plaintive melody. And now the
question is: does he hear the plaint?

And if i reply: no, he doesnt hear it, he merely has a sense of it
where does that get us? One cannot mention a sense-organ for this
sense.

Some would like to reply here: of course i hear it! Others:
i dont really hear it.

We can, however, establish differences of concept here.

We react to the visual impression differently from someone who does
not recognize it as timid (in the full sense of the word). But i do not
want to say here that we feel this reaction in our muscles and joints
and that this is the sensing. No, what we have here is a modified
concept of sensation .

2ioe

philosophical investigations ilxi

one might say of someone that he was blind to the expression of a
face. Would his eyesight on that account be defective?

This is, of course, not simply a question for physiology. Here the
physiological is a symbol of the logical.

If you feel the seriousness of a tune, what are you perceiving?
Nothing that could be conveyed by reproducing what you heard.

I can imagine some arbitrary cipherthis, for instance:

to be a stricdy correct letter of some foreign alphabet. Or again, to
be a faultily written one, and faulty in this way or that: for example,
it might be slap-dash, or typical childish awkwardness, or like the
flourishes in a legal document. It could deviate from the correctly
written letter in a variety of ways. And i can see it in various
aspects according to the fiction i surround it with. And here there is a
close kinship with experiencing the meaning of a word.

I should like to say that what dawns here lasts only as long as i am

occupied with the object in a particular way. (see, its looking! )-

i should like to sayand is it so? -ask yourself for how long

am i struck by a thing? For how long do i find it new ?

The aspect presents a physiognomy which then passes away. It
is almost as if there were a face there which at first i imitate , and then
accept without imitating it. And isnt this really explanation enough?
But isnt it too much?

I observed the likeness between him and his father for a few
minutes, and then no longer. One might say this if his face were
changing and only looked like his fathers for a short time. But it can
also mean that after a few minutes i stopped being struck by the
likeness.

After the likeness had struck you, how long were you aware of it?
What kind of answer might one give to this question? I soon
stopped thinking about it, or it struck me again from time to time,
or i several times had the thought, how like they arel, or i mar
velled at the likeness for at least a minutethat is the sort of answer
you would get.

I should like to put the question am i aware of the spatial character,
the depth of an object (of this cupboard for instance), the whole time

philosophical investigations hxi 2ii

i am seeing it? Do i, so to speak, feel it the whole time? But put the
question in the third person. When would you say of someone that he
was aware of it the whole time, and when the opposite? Of course,
one could ask him, but how did he learn how to answer such a
question? He knows what it means to feel pain continuously.
But that will only confuse him here (as it confuses me).

If he now says he is continuously aware of the depthdo i believe
him? And if he says he is aware of it only occasionally (when talking
about it, perhaps)do i believe that ? These answers will strike me as
resting on a false foundation. It will be different if he says that the
object sometimes strikes him as flat, sometimes as three-dimensional.

Someone tells me: i looked at the flower, but was thinking of
something else and was not conscious of its colour. Do i understand
this? I can imagine a significant context, say his going on: then i
suddenly saw it, and realized it was the one which..

Or again: if i had turned away then, i could not have said what
colour it was.

He looked at it without seeing it. There is such a thing. But
what is the criterion for it? Well, there is a variety of cases here.

Just now i looked at the shape rather than at the colour. Do not
let such phrases confuse you. Above all, dont wonder what can
be going on in the eyes or brain?

The likeness makes a striking impression on me; then the impression
fades.

It only struck me for a few minutes, and then no longer did.

What happened here? What can i recall? My own facial expression
comes to mind; i could reproduce it. If someone who knew me had
seen my face he would have said something about his face struck you
just now. There further occurs to me what i say on such an occa
sion, out loud or to myself. And that is all. And is this what being
struck is? No. These are the phenomena of being struck; but they are
what happens.

Is being struck looking plus thinking? No. Many of our concepts
cross here.

(thinking and inward speechi do not say  to oneselfare
different concepts. )

212 philosophical investigations ilxi

the colour of the visual impression corresponds to the colour of
the object (this blotting paper looks pink to me, and is pink)the
shape of the visual impression to the shape of the object (it looks rect
angular to me, and is rectangular)but what i perceive in the dawning
of an aspect is not a property of the object, but an internal relation
between it and other objects.

It is almost as if seeing the sign in this context were an echo of a
thought.

The echo of a thought in sightone would like to say.

Imagine a physiological explanation of the experience. Let it be
this: when we look at the figure, our eyes scan it repeatedly, always
following a particular path. The path corresponds to a particular
pattern of oscillation of the eyeballs in the act of looking. It is possible
to jump from one such pattern to another and for the two to alternate.
(aspects a. ) certain patterns of movement are physiologically im
possible; hence, for example, i cannot see the schematic cube as two
interpenetrating prisms. And so on. Let this be the explanation.
Yes, that shews it is a kind of seeing you have now introduced a
new, a physiological, criterion for seeing. And this can screen the old
problem from view, but not solve it. The purpose of this paragraph
however, was to bring before our view what happens when a physio
logical explanation is offered. The psychological concept hangs out of
reach of this explanation. And this makes the nature of the problem
clearer.

Do i really see something different each time, or do i only interpret
what i see in a different way? I am inclined to say the former. But
why? To interpret is to think, to do something; seeing is a state.

Now it is easy to recognize cases in which we are interpreting. When
we interpret we form hypotheses, which may prove false. I am

seeing this figure as a. Can be verified as little as (or in the same

sense as) i am seeing bright red. So there is a similarity in the use
of seeing in the two contexts. Only do not think you knew in
advance what the state of seeing means here! Let the use teach you
the meaning.

We find certain things about seeing puzzling, because we do not
find the whole business of seeing puzzling enough.

Philosophical investigations ilxi 213

if you look at a photograph of people, houses and trees, you do not
feel the lack of the third dimension in it. We should not find it easy
to describe a photograph as a collection of colour-patches on a flat
surface; but what we see in a stereoscope looks three-dimensional in
a different way again.

(it is anything but a matter of course that we see three-dimension-
ally with two eyes. If the two visual images are amalgamated, we
might expect a blurred one as a result. )

the concept of an aspect is akin to the concept of an image. In
other words: the concept "i air now seeing it as ... . Is akin to t am
now having this image.

Doesnt it take imagination to hear something as a variation on a
particular theme? And yet one is perceiving something in so hearing it.

Imagine this changed like this, and you have this other thing.
One can use imagining in the course of proving something.

Seeing an aspect and imagining are subject to the will. There is
such an order as imagine this , and also: now see the figure like
this"; but not: now see this leaf green.

The question now arises: could there be human beings lacking in
the capacity to see something as something and what would that be
like? What sort of consequences would it have? Would this defect
be comparable to colour-blindness or to not having absolute pitch?
We will call it aspect-blindnessand will next consider what might
be meant by this. (a conceptual investigation. ) the aspect-blind man
is supposed not to see the aspects a change. But is he also supposed
not to recognize that the double cross contains both a black and a
white cross? So if told shew me figures containing a black cross
among these examples will he be unable to manage it? No, he should
be able to do that; but he will not be supposed to say: now its a
black cross on a white ground i

is he supposed to be blind to the similarity between two faces?
And so also to their identity or approximate identity? I do not want
to settle this. (he ought to be able to execute such orders as bring
me something that looks like this")

ought he to be unable to see the schematic cube as a cube? It
would not follow from that that he could not recognize it as a repre
sentation (a working drawing for instance) of a cube. But for him it

philosophical investigations uxi

214*

would not jump from one aspect to the other. Question: ought he
to be able to take it as a cube in certain circumstances, as we do?
If not, this could not very well be called a sort of blindness.

The aspect-blind will have an altogether different relationship to
pictures from ours.

(anomalies of this kind are easy for us to imagine. )

aspect-blindness will be akin to the lack of a musical ear.

The importance of this concept lies in the connexion between the
concepts of seeing an aspect and experiencing the meaning of a
word. For we want to ask what would you be missing if you
did not experience the meaning of a word?

What would you be missing, for instance, if you did not understand
the request to pronounce the word till and to mean it as a verb, or
if you did not feel that a word lost its meaning and became a mere
sound if it was repeated ten times over?

In a law-court, for instance, the question might be raised how
someone meant a word. And this can be inferred from certain facts.
It is a question of intention . But could how he experienced a word
the word bank for instancehave been significant in the same way?

Suppose i had agreed on a code with someone; tower means
bank. I tell him now go to the towerhe understands me and
acts accordingly, but he feels the word tower to be strange in this
use, it has not yet taken on the meaning.

When i read a poem or narrative with feeling, surely something
goes on in me which does not go on when i merely skim the lines for
information. What processes am i alluding to? The sentences have
a different ring. I pay careful attention to my intonation. Sometimes
a word has the wrong intonation, i emphasize it too much or too little.
I notice this and shew it in my face. I might later talk about my
reading in detail, for example about the mistakes in my tone of voice.
Sometimes a picture, as it were an illustration, comes to me. And this
seems to help me to read with the correct expression. And i could
mention a good deal more of the same kind. I can also give a word
a tone of voice which brings out the meaning of the rest, almost as if
this word were a picture of the whole thing. (and this may, of course,
depend on sentence-formation. )

philosophical investigations ha 215

when i pronounce this word while reading with expression it is
completely filled with its meaning. How can this be, if meaning
is the use of the word? Well, what i said was intended figuratively.
Not that i chose the figure: it forced itself on me. But the figurative
employment of the word cant get into conflict with the original one.

Perhaps it could be explained why precisely this picture suggests
itself to me. (just think of the expression, and the meaning of the
expression: the word that hits it off. ) ,

but if a sentence can strike me as like a painting in words, and the
very individual word in the sentence as like a picture, then it is no such
marvel that a word uttered in isolation and without purpose can seem
to carry a particular meaning in itself.

Think here of a special kind of illusion which throws light on these
matters. I go for a walk in the environs of a city with a friend.
As we talk it comes out that i am imagining the city to lie on our right.
Not only have i no conscious reason for this assumption, but some
quite simple consideration was enough to make me realize that the
city lay rather to the left ahead of us. I can at first give no answer
to the question why i imagine the city in this direction. I had no reason
to think it. But though i see no reason still i seem to see certain
psychological causes for it. In particular, certain associations and
memories. For example, we walked along a canal, and once before
in similar circumstances i had followed a canal and that time the city
lay on our right. I might try as it were psychoanalytically to discover
the causes of my unfounded conviction.

But what is this queer experience? Of course it is not queerer
than any other; it simply differs in kind from those experiences which
we regard as the most fundamental ones, our sense impressions for
instance.

I feel as if i knew the city lay over there. I feel as if the name
schubert fitted schuberts works and schuberts face.

You can say the word march to yourself and mean it at one time
as an imperative at another as the name of a month. And now say
march 1and then march no furtber \does the same experience
accompany the word both timesare you sure?

If a sensitive ear shews me, when i am playing this game, that i
have now this now that experience of the worddoesnt it also shew

2 l6 e

philosophical investigations ilxi

me that i often do not have any experience of it in the course of talk
ing? For the fact that i then also mean it, intend it, now like this now
like that , and maybe also say so later is, of course, not in question.

But the question now remains why, in connexion with this game of
experiencing a word, we also speak of the meaning and of m eanin g

it. This is a different kind of question. -it is the phenomenon

which is characteristic of this language-game that in this situation we
use this expression: we say we pronounced the word with this meaning
and take this expression over from that other language-game.

Call it a dream. It does not change anything.

Given the two ideas fat and lean, would you be rather inclined
to say that wednesday was fat and tuesday lean, or vice versa ?
(i incline decisively towards the former. ) now have fat and
lean some different meaning here from their usual one? They
have a different use. So ought i really to have used different
words? Certainly not that. I want to use these words (with their
familiar meanings) here. Now, i say nothing about the causes of this
phenomenon. They might be associations from my childhood. But that
is a hypothesis. Whatever the explanation, the inclination is there.

Asked what do you really mean here by fat and lean? _i

could only explain the meanings in the usual way. I could not point
to the examples of tuesday and wednesday.

Here one might speak of a primary and secondary sense of a
word. It is only if the word has the primary sense for you that you
use it in the secondary one.

Only if you have learnt to calculateon paper or out loudcan
you be made to grasp, by means of this concept, what calculating in
the head is.

The secondary sense is not a metaphorical sense. If i say for me
the vowel e is yellow i do not mean: yellow in a metaphorical
sense, for i could not express what i want to say in any other way
than by means of the idea yellow.

Someone tells me: wait for me by the bank. Question: did you,
as you were saying the word, mean this bank? This question is of the
same kind as did you intend to say such-and-such to him on your
way to meet him? It refers to a definite time (the time of walking, as
the former question refers to the time of speaking)but not to an

philosophical investigations exi

217

experience during that time. Meaning is as little an experience as
intending.

But what distinguishes them from experience? They have no
experience-content. For the contents (images for instance) which
accompany and illustrate them are not the meaning or intending.

The intention with which one acts does not accompany" the action
any more than the thought accompanies" speech. Thought and inten
tion are neither articulated" nor non-articulated"; to be compared
neither with a single note which sounds during the acting or speaking,
nor with a tune.

Talking" (whether out loud or silently) and thinking" are not
concepts of the same kind; even though they are in closest connexion.

The interest of the experiences one has while speaking and of the
intention is not the same. (the experiences might perhaps inform
a psychologist about the  unconscious " intention. )

at that word we both thought of him. "" let us assume that each
of us said the same words to himselfand how can it mean more
than that? But wouldnt even those words be only a germ} they
must surely belong to a language and to a context, in order really to
be the expression of the thought of that man.

If god had looked into our minds he would not have been able to
see there whom we were speaking of.

Why did you look at me at that word, were you thinking of... . ? ""
so there is a reaction at a certain moment and it is explained by
saying i thought of.... "" or i suddenly remembered

in saying this you refer to that moment in the time you were
speaking. It makes a difference whether you refer to this or to that
moment.

Mere explanation of a word does not refer to an occurrence at the
moment of speaking.

The language-game i mean (or meant) this 97 (subsequent explana
tion of a word) is quite different from this one: i thought of.... As i
said it. "" the latter is akin to it reminded me of.... ""

i have already remembered three times today that i must write to
him. "" of what importance is it what went on in me then? On the

218*

philosophical investigations ilxi

other hand what is the importance, what the interest, of the statement
itself? It permits certain conclusions.

| at these words he occurred to me. What is the primitive reaction
: with which the language-game beginswhich can then be translated
i into these words? How do people get to use these words?

\ the primitive reaction may have been a glance or a gesture, but it
| may also have been a word.

Why did you look at me and shake your head? I wanted to give

you to understand that you. This is supposed to express not 2

symbolic convention but the purpose of my action.

Meaning it is not a process which accompanies a word. For no
process could have the consequences of meaning.

(similarly, i think, it could be said: a calculation is not an experi
ment, for no experiment could have the peculiar consequences of a
multiplication. )

there are important accompanying phenomena of talking which are
often missing when one talks without thinking, and this is characteristic
of talking without thinking. But they are not the thinking.

Now i know 1 what went on here? -so did i not know, when

i declared that now i knew?

You are looking at it wrong.

(what is the signal for? )

and could the knowing be called an accompaniment of the
exclamation?

The familiar physiognomy of a word, the feeling that it has taken up
its meaning into itself, that it is an actual likeness of its meaningthere
could be human beings to whom all this was alien. (they would not
have an attachment to their words. )and how are these feelings
manifested among us? By the way we choose and value words.

How do i find the right word? How do i choose among words?
Without doubt it is sometimes as if i were comparing them by fine

differences of smell: that is too. , that is too. , this is

the right one. But i do not always have to make judgments, give
explanations; often i might only say: it simply isnt right yet. I am
dissatisfied, i go on looking. At last a word comes: thafs it!
Sometimes i can say why. This is simply what searching, this is what
finding, is like here.

Philosophical investigations hxi 219

but doesnt the word that occurs to you somehow come in a special
way? Just attend and youll see! Careful attention is no use to me. All
it could discover would be what is now going on in me.

And how can i, precisely now, listen for it at all? I ought to have to
wait until a word occurs to me anew. This, however, is the queer
thing: it seems as though i did not have to wait on the occasion, but
could give myself an exhibition of it, even when it is not actually
taking place. How? I act it. But what can i learn in this way?
What do i reproduce? Characteristic accompaniments. Primarily:
gestures, faces, tones of voice.

It is possibleand this is importantto say a great deal about a line
aesthetic difference. The first thing you say may, of course, be just:
this word fits, that doesntor something of the kind. But then
you can discuss all the extensive ramifications of the tie-up effected
by each of the words. That first judgment is not the end of the matter,
for it is the field of force of a word that is decisive.

The word is on the tip of my tongue. What is going on in my
consciousness? That is not the point at all. Whatever did go on was not
what was meant by that expression. It is of more interest what went
on in my behaviour. The word is on the tip of my tongue tells
you: the word which belongs here has escaped me, but i hope to find it
soon. For the rest the verbal expression does no more than certain
wordless behaviour.

James, in writing of this subject, is really trying to say: what a
remarkable experience! The word is not there yet, and yet in a certain
sense is there, or something is there, which cannot grow into anything
but this word. But this is not experience at all. Interpreted as
experience it does indeed look odd. As does intention, when it is
interpreted as the accompaniment of action; or again, like minus one
interpreted as a cardinal number.

The words its on the tip of my tongue are no more the expression
of an experience than now i know how to go on! We use them in
certain situations > and they are surrounded by behaviour of a special
kind, and also by some characteristic experiences. In particular they
are frequently followed by finding the word. (ask yourself: what
would it be like if human beings never found the word that was on the
tip of their tongue? )

220 

philosophical investigations ilxi

silent internal speech is not a half hidden phenomenon which is
as it were seen through a veil. It is not hidden at all, but the concept
may easily confuse us, for it runs over a long stretch cheek by jowl
with the concept of an outward process, and yet does not coincide
with it.

(the question whether the muscles of the larynx are innervated in
connexion with internal speech, and similar things, may be of great
interest, but not in our investigation. )

the close relationship between saying inwardly and saying is
manifested in the possibility of telling out loud what one said inwardly,
and of an outward actions accompanying inward speech. (i can sing
inwardly, or read silently, or calculate in my head, and beat time with
my hand as i do so. )

but saying things inwardly is surely a certain activity which i
have to learn i very well; but what is doing and what is learning
here?

Let the use of words teach you their meaning. (similarly one can
often say in mathematics: let the proof teach you what was being
proved. )

so i dont really calculate, when i calculate in my head? After all,
you yourself distinguish between calculation in the head and perceptible
calculation! But you can only learn what calculating in the head is
by learning what calculating is; you can only learn to calculate in your
head by learning to calculate.

One can say things in ones head very distinctly, when one repro
duces the tone of voice of ones sentences by humming (with closed
lips). Movements of the larynx help too. But the remarkable thing is
precisely that one then hears the talk in ones imagination and does not
merely feel the skeleton of it, so to speak, in ones larynx. (for human
beings could also well be imagined calculating silently with movements
of the larynx, as one can calculate on ones fingers. )

a hypothesis, such as that such-and-such went on in our bodies
when we made internal calculations, is only of interest to us in that it
points to a possible use of the expression i said .... To myself;
namely that of inferring the physiological process from the expression.

That what someone else says to himself is hidden from me is part
of the concept saying inwardly. Only hidden is the wrong word |

philosophical investigations ilxi

22i

here; for if it is hidden from me, it ought to be apparent to him, he
would have to know it. But he does not know* it; only, the doubt
which exists for me does not exist for him.

What anyone says to himself within himself is hidden from me
might of course also mean that i can for the most part not guess it,
nor can i read it off from, for example, the movements of his throat
(which would be a possibility. )

i know what i want, wish, believe, feel,. (and so on

through all the psychological verbs) is either philosophers nonsense,
or at any rate not a judgment a priori .

I know.. May mean i do not doubt... But does not mean
that the words i doubt... Are senseless , that doubt is logically
excluded.

One says i know where one can also say i believe or i suspect;
where one can find out. (if you bring up against me the case of peoples
saying but i must know if i am in pain! , only you can know what
you feel, and similar things, you should consider the occasion and
purpose of these phrases. War is war is not an example of the law
of identity, either. )

it is possible to imagine a case in which i could find out that i had two
hands. Normally, however, i cannot do so. But all you need is to hold
them up before your eyes iif i am now in doubt whether i have two
hands, i need not believe my eyes either. (i might just as well ask a
friend. )

with this is connected the fact that, for instance, the proposition
the earth has existed for millions of years makes clearer sense than
the earth has existed in the last five minutes. For i should ask
anyone who asserted the latter: what observations does this pro
position refer to; and what observations would count against it?
Whereas i know what ideas and observations the former proposition
goes with.

A new-born child has no teeth. A goose has no teeth. A
rose has no teeth. This last at any rateone would like to sayis
obviously true! It is even surer than that a goose has none. And yet
it is none so clear. For where should a roses teeth have been? The
goose has none in its jaw. And neither, of course, has it any in its

ill 

philosophical investigations hxi

wings; but no one means that when he says it has no teeth. Why,
suppose one were to say: the cow chews its food and then dungs the rose
with it, so the rose has teeth in the mouth of a beast. This would not
be absurd, because one has no notion in advance where to look for
teeth in a rose. ((connexion with pain in someone elses body. ))

i can know what someone else is thinking, not what i am thinking.

It is correct to say i know what you are thinking, and wrong to
say i know what i am thinking.

(a whole cloud of philosophy condensed into a drop of grammar. )

a mans thinking goes on within his consciousness in a seclusion'
in comparison with which any physical seclusion is an exhibition to
public view.

If there were people who always read the silent internal discourse
of otherssay by observing the larynxwould they too be inclined
to use the picture of complete seclusion?

If i were to talk to myself out loud in a language not understood by
those present my thoughts would be hidden from them.

Let us assume there was a man who always guessed right what i
was saying to myself in my thoughts. (it does not matter how he
manages it. ) but what is the criterion for his guessing right? Well,
i am a truthful person and i confess that he has guessed right. But
might i not be mistaken, can my memory not deceive me? And might it
not always do so whenwithout lyingi express what i have thought

within myself? -but now it does appear that what went on within

me is not the point at all. (here i am drawing a construction-line. )

the criteria for the truth of the confession that i thought such-and-such
are not the criteria for a true description of a process. And the import
ance of the true confession does not reside in its being a correct and
retrain report of a process. It resides rather in the special consequences
which can be drawn from a confession whose truth is guaranteed by
the special criteria of truthfulness.

(assuming that dreams can yield important information about the
dreamer, what yielded the information would be truthful accounts of
dreams. The question whether the dreamers memory deceives him
when he reports the dream after waking cannot arise, unless indeed
we introduce a completely new criterion for the reports agreeing

philosophical investigations ilxi 223*

with the dream, a criterion which gives us a concept of truth* as
distinct from truthfulness* here. )

there is a game of guessing thoughts*. A variant of it would be
this: i tell a something in a language that b does not understand.
B is supposed to guess the meaning of what i say. Another variant:
i write down a sentence which the other person cannot see. He has to
guess the words or their sense. Yet another: i am putting a jig-saw
puzzle together; the other person cannot see me but from time to time
guesses my thoughts and utters them. He says, for instance, now
where is this bit ? **now i know how it fits ! **i have no idea what
goes in here, **the sky is always the hardest part* and so onbut i
need not be talking to myself either out loud or silently at the time.

All this would be guessing at thoughts; and the fact that it does not
actually happen does not make thought any more hidden than the
unperceived physical proceedings.

What is internal is hidden from us. **the future is hidden from us.
But does the astronomer think like this when he calculates an eclipse of
the sun?

If i see someone writhing in pain with evident cause i do not think:
all the same, his feelings are hidden from me.

We also say of some people that they are transparent to us. It is,
however, important as regards this observation that one human being
can be a complete enigma to another. We learn this when we come
into a strange country with entirely strange traditions; and, what is
more, even given a mastery of the countrys language. We do not
understand the people. (and not because of not knowing what they are
saying to themselves. ) we cannot find our feet with them.

I cannot know what is going on in him is above all a picture . It is
the convincing expression of a conviction. It does not give the
reasons for the conviction. They are not readily accessible.

If a lion could talk, we could not understand him.

It is possible to imagine a guessing of intentions like the guessing
of thoughts, but also a guessing of what someone is actually going to do.

To say he alone can know what he intends is nonsense: to say
he alone can know what he will do, wrong. For the prediction
contained in my expression of intention (for example when it strikes

224*

philosophical investigations ilxi

five i am going home) need not come true, and someone else may
know what will really happen.

Two points, however, are important: one, that in many cases some
one else cannot predict my actions, whereas i foresee them in my
intentions; the other, that my prediction (in my expression of inten
tion) has not the same foundation as his prediction of what i shall do,
and the conclusions to be drawn from these predictions are quite
different.

I can be as certain of someone elses sensations as of any fact. But
this does not make the propositions he is much depressed, 25 x
25 =625 and i am sixty years old into similar instruments. The
explanation suggests itself that the certainty is of a different kind .
This seems to point to a psychological, difference. But the difference is
logical.

But, if you are certain , isnt it that you are shutting your eyes in face
of doubt? They are shut.

Am i less certain that this man is in pain than that twice two is

four? Does this shew the former to be mathematical certainty? -

mathematical certainty is not a psychological concept.

The kind of certainty is the kind of language-game.

He alone knows his motivesthat is an expression of the fact
that we ask him what his motives are. If he is sincere he will tell us
them; but i need more than sincerity to guess his motives. This is
where there is a kinship with the case of knowing.

Let yourself be struck by the existence of such a thing as our lan
guage-game of: confessing the motive of my action.

We remain unconscious of the prodigious diversity of all the every
day language-games because the clothing of our language makes
everything alike.

Something new (spontaneous, specific) is always a language-game.

What is the difference between cause and motive? How is die
motive discovered , and how the cause?

There is such a question as: is this a reliable way of judging peoples
motives? But in order to be able to ask this we must know what
judging a motive means; and we do not learn this by being told
what  motive  is and what judging is.

Philosophical investigations ilxi

2256

one judges the length of a rod and can look for and find some
method of judging it more exactly or more reliably. Soyou say
what is judged here is independent of the method of judging it. What
length is cannot be defined by the method of determining length.
To think like this is to make a mistake. What mistake? To say the
height of mont blanc depends on how one climbs it would be queer.
And one wants to compare ever more accurate measurement of
length with the nearer and nearer approach to an object. But in
certain cases it is, and in certain cases it is not, clear what approaching
nearer to the length of an object means. What determining the
length means is not learned by learning what length and determining
are; the meaning of the word length is learnt by learning, among
other things, what it is to determine length.

(for this reason the word methodology has a double meaning.
Not only a physical investigation, but also a conceptual one, can be
called methodological investigation. )

we should sometimes like to call certainty and belief tones, colour
ings, of thought; and it is true that they receive expression in the tone
of voice. But do not think of them as feelings which we have in
speaking or thinking.

Ask, not: what goes on in us when we are certain that.... ?
But: how is the certainty that this is the case manifested in human
action?

While you can have complete certainty about someone elses state
of mind, still it is always merely subjective, not objective, certainty.
These two words betoken a difference between language-games.

There can be a dispute over the correct result of a calculation (say
of a rather long addition). But such disputes are rare and of short
duration. They can be decided, as we say, with certainty.

Mathematicians do not in general quarrel over the result of a
calculation. (this is an important fact. )if it were otherwise, if for
instance one mathematician was convinced that a figure had altered
unperceived, or that his or someone elses memory had been deceived,
and so onthen our concept of mathematical certainty would not
exist.

Even then it might always be said: true we can never know what
the result of a calculation is, but for all that it always has a quite

22 (je philosophical investigations ilxi

definite result. (god knows it. ) mathematics is indeed of the highest

certaintythough we only have a crude reflection of it.

But am i trying to say some such thing as that the certainty of mathe
matics is based on the reliability of ink and paper? No. (that would be
a vicious circle. )i have not said why mathematicians do not quarrel,
but only that they do not.

It is no doubt true that you could not calculate with certain sorts
of paper and ink, if, that is, they were subject to certain queer changes
but still the fact that they changed could in turn only be got from
memory and comparison with other means of calculation. And how
are these tested in their turn?

What has to be accepted, the given, isso one could say forms of
life.

Does it make sense to say that people generally agree in their
ju d g m e n ts of colour? What would it be like for them not to? One
man would say a flower was red which another called blue, and so on.
But what right should we have to call these peoples words red
and blue our colour-words?

How would they learn to use these words? And is the language-
game which they learn still such as we call the use of names of colour?
There are evidendy differences of degree here.

This consideration must, however, apply to mathematics too. If
there were not complete agreement, then neither would human beings
be learning the technique which we learn. It would be more or less
different from ours up to the point of unrecognizability.

But mathematical truth is independent of whether human beings
know it or notlcertainly, the propositions human beings believe
that twice two is four and twice two is four do not mean the
same. The latter is a mathematical proposition; the other, if it makes
sense at all, may perhaps mean: human beings have arrived at the
mat-vifmatiral proposition. The two propositions have entirely different
uses . But what would this mean: even though everybody believed
that twice two was five it would still be four? For what would it be
like for everybody to believe that? Well, i could imagine, for instance,
that people had a different calculus, or a technique which we should

philosophical investigations ilxi

zzje

not call calculating. But would it be wrong* (is a coronation wrong ?
To beings different from ourselves it might look extremely odd. )

of course, in one sense mathematics is a branch of knowledge,
but still it is also an activity. And false moves* can only exist as the
exception. For if what we now call by that name became the rule, the
game in which they were false moves would have been abrogated.

We all learn the same multiplication table. This might, no doubt,
be a remark about the teaching of arithmetic in our schools, but also
an observation about the concept of the multiplication table. (in
a horse-race the horses generally run as fast as they can. )

there is such a thing as colour-blindness and there are ways of
establishing it. There is in general complete agreement in the judg
ments of colours made by those who have been diagnosed normal.
This characterizes the concept of a judgment of colour.

There is in general no such agreement over the question whether
an expression of feeling is genuine or not.

I am sure, sure, that he is not pretending; but some third person is
not. Can i always convince him? And if not is there some mistake in
his reasoning or observations?

Youre all at sea! We say this when someone doubts what we
recognize as clearly genuinebut we cannot prove anything.

Is there such a thing as expert judgment* about the genuineness of
expressions of feeling? Even here, there are those whose judgment is
better* and those whose judgment is worse*.

Correcter prognoses will generally issue from the judgments of
those with better knowledge of mankind.

Can one learn this knowledge? Yes; some can. Not, however,
by taking a course in it, but through  experience *. Can someone else
be a mans teacher in this? Certainly. From time to time he gives him
the right tip . This is what learning* and teaching* are like here.
What one acquires here is not a technique; one learns correct judgments.
There are also rules, but they do not form a system, and only ex
perienced people can apply them right. Unlike calculating-rules.

What is most difficult here is to put this indefiniteness, correctly
and unfalsified, into words.

228

philosophical investigations ilri

the genuineness of an expression cannot be proved; one has to
feel it. Very well, but what does one go on to do with this
recognition of genuineness? If someone says voila ce que peut dire
un cceur vraiment 6prisand if he also brings someone else to the
same mind, what are the further consequences? Or are there none,
and does the game end with one persons relishing what another does
not?

There are certainly consequences , but of a diffuse kind. Experience,
that is varied observation, can inform us of them, and they too are
incapable of general formulation; only in scattered cases can one arrive
at a correct and fruitful judgment, establish a fruitful connexion.
And the most general remarks yield at best what looks like the frag
ments of a system.

It is certainly possible to be convinced by evidence that someone
is in such-and-such a state of mind, that, for instance, he is not pre
tending. But evidence here includes imponderable evidence.

The question is: what does imponderable evidence accomplish ?

Suppose there were imponderable evidence for the chemical
(internal) structure of a substance, still it would have to prove itself
to be evidence by certain consequences which can be weighed.

(imponderable evidence might convince someone that a picture was
a genuine .... But it is possible for this to be proved right by docu
mentary evidence as well. )

imponderable evidence includes subtleties of glance, of gesture, of
tone.

I may recognize a genuine loving look, distinguish it from a
pretended one (and here there can, of course, be a ponderable
confirmation of my judgment). But i may be quite incapable of
describing the difference. And this not because the languages i know
have no words for it. For why not introduce new words? If i were
a very talented painter i might conceivably represent the genuine and
the simulated glance in pictures.

Ask yourself: how does a man learn to get a nose for something?
And how can this nose be used?

Pretending is, of course, only a special case of someones producing
(say) expressions of pain when he is not in pain. For if this is possible

philosophical investigations ilri 22^

at all, why should it always be pretending that is taking placethis
very special pattern in the weave of our lives?

A child has much to learn before it can pretend. (a dog cannot be a
hypocrite, but neither can he be sincere. )

there might actually occur a case where we should say this man
believes he is pretending.

Xu

if the formation of concepts can be explained by facts of nature,
should we not be interested, not in grammar, but rather in that in
nature which is the basis of grammar? Our interest certainly includes
the correspondence between concepts and very general facts of nature.
(such facts as mostly do not strike us because of their generality. )
but our interest does not fall back upon these possible causes of die
formation of concepts; we are not doing natural science; nor yet
natural historysince we can also invent fictitious natural history for
our purposes.

I am not saying: if such-and-such facts of nature were different
people would have different concepts (in the sense of a hypothesis).
But: if anyone believes that certain concepts are absolutely the correct
ones, and that having different ones would mean not realizing some
thing that we realizethen let him imagine certain very general facts
of nature to be different from what we are used to, and the formation
of concepts different from the usual ones will become intelligible to
him.

Compare a concept with a style of painting. For is even our style of
painting arbitrary? Can we choose one at pleasure? (the egyptian,
for instance. ) is it a mere question of pleasing and ugly?

Xiii

when i say: he was here half an hour agothat is, remembering
itthis is not the description of a present experience.

Memory-experiences are accompaniments of remembering.

Remembering has no experiential content. Surely this can be seen
by introspection? Doesnt it shew precisely that there is nothing there,
when i look about for a content? But it could only shew this in this
case or that. And even so it cannot shew me what the word to
remember means, and hence where to look for a content i

i get the idea of a memory-content only because i assimilate psycho
logical concepts. It is like assimilating two games. (football has
goals, tennis not. )

would this situation be conceivable: someone remembers for the
first time in his life and says yes, now i know what remembering is,
what it feels like to remember. How does he know that this feeling
is remembering? Compare: yes, now i know what tingling is.
(he has perhaps had an electric shock for the first time. )does he
know that it is memory because it is caused by something past? And
how does he know what the past is? Man learns the concept of the
past by remembering.

And how will he know again in the future what remembering feels
like?

(on the other hand one might, perhaps, speak of a feeling long,
long ago, for there is a tone, a gesture, which go with certain narra
tives of past times. )

231^

the confusion and barrenness of psychology is not to be explained
by calling it a young science; its state is not comparable with that of
physics, for instance, in its beginnings. (rather with that of certain
branches of mathematics. Set theory. ) for in psychology there are
experimental methods and conceptual confusion . (as in the other case
conceptual confusion and methods of proof. )

the existence of the experimental method makes us think we have
the means of solving the problems which trouble us; though problem
and method pass one another by.

An investigation is possible in connexion with mathematics which
is entirely analogous to our investigation of psychology. It is just as
little a mathematical investigation as the other is a psychological one.
It will not contain calculations, so it is not for example logistic.
It might deserve the name of an investigation of the foundations of
mathematics.