Preface

this book will perhaps only be understood by those who have them-
selves already thought the thoughts which are expressed in itor similar
thoughts. It is therefore not a text-book. Its ob ject would be attained
if there were one person who read it with understanding and to whom it
aorded pleasure.

The book deals with the problems of philosophy and shows, as i
believe, that the method of formulating these problems rests on the mis-
understanding of the logic of our language. Its whole meaning could be
summed up somewhat as follows: what can be said at all can be said
clearly; and whereof one cannot speak thereof one must be silent.

The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, or rathernot to
thinking, but to the expression of thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit
to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit
(we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought).

The limit can, therefore, only be drawn in language and what lies on
the other side of the limit will be simply nonsense.

How far my eorts agree with those of other philosophers i will not
decide. Indeed what i have here written makes no claim to novelty in
points of detail; and therefore i give no sources, because it is indierent
to me whether what i have thought has already been thought before me
by another.

I will only mention that to the great works of frege and the writings
of my friend bertrand russell i owe in large measure the stimulation of
my thoughts.

If this work has a value it consists in two things. First that in it
thoughts are expressed, and this value will be the greater the better the
thoughts are expressed. The more the nail has been hit on the head.
Here i am conscious that i have fallen far short of the possible. Simply
because my powers are insucient to cope with the task. May others
come and do it better.

23
truth on the other hand the of the thoughts communicated here seems

to me unassailable and denitive. I am, therefore, of the opinion that the

problems have in essentials been nally solved. And if i am not mistaken

in this, then the value of this work secondly consists in the fact that it

shows how little has been done when these problems have been solved.

24
1 the world is everything that is the case. *

1.1 the world is the totality of facts, not of things.
1.11
all the world is determined by the facts, and by these being the

facts.

1.12 for the totality of facts determines both what is the case, and
also all that is not the case.

1.13 the facts in logical space are the world.

1.2 the world divides into facts.

1.21 any one can either be the case or not be the case, and everything
else remain the same.

2 what is the case, the fact, is the existence of atomic facts.

2.01 an atomic fact is a combination of ob jects (entities, things).

2.011 it is essential to a thing that it can be a constituent part of an
2.012
atomic fact.

Can in logic nothing is accidental: if a thing occur in an atomic

fact the possibility of that atomic fact must already be prejudged

in the thing.

2.0121 it would, so to speak, appear as an accident, when to a thing
that could exist alone on its own account, subsequently a state
of aairs could be made to t.

If things can occur in atomic facts, this possibility must al-
ready lie in them.

*the decimal gures as numbers of the separate propositions indicate the logical

importance of the propositions, the emphasis laid upon them in my exposition. The
propositions n.1, n.2, n.3, etc. , are comments on proposition no. N ; the propositions
n. M 1, n. M 2, etc. , are comments on the proposition no. N. M ; and so on.

25
tractatus logico-philosophicus

(a logical entity cannot be merely possible. Logic treats of
every possibility, and all possibilities are its facts. )

just as we cannot think of spatial ob jects at all apart from

space, or temporal objects apart from time, so we cannot think

any of object apart from the possibility of its connexion with

other things.

If i can think of an object in the context of an atomic fact,

possibility i cannot think of it apart from the of this context.

2.0122 pos- the thing is independent, in so far as it can occur in all
sible circumstances, but this form of independence is a form of

connexion with the atomic fact, a form of dependence. (it is

impossible for words to occur in two dierent ways, alone and in the proposition. )

2.0123 if i know an object, then i also know all the possibilities of its
occurrence in atomic facts.

(every such possibility must lie in the nature of the object. )

a new possibility cannot subsequently be found.

2.01231 in order to know an object, i must know not its external but all

its internal qualities.

Possible 2.0124 if all objects are given, then thereby are all atomic facts

also given.

2.013 every thing is, as it were, in a space of possible atomic facts. I
can think of this space as empty, but not of the thing without
the space.

2.0131 a spatial object must lie in innite space. (a point in space is
a place for an argument. )

a speck in a visual eld need not be red, but it must have a

colour; it has, so to speak, a colour space round it. A tone must

a a have pitch, the object of the sense of touch hardness, etc.

2.014 objects contain the possibility of all states of aairs.

2.0141 the possibility of its occurrence in atomic facts is the form of
the object.

2.02 the object is simple.

2.0201 every statement about complexes can be analysed into a state-

26
tractatus logico-philosophicus

ment about their constituent parts, and into those propositions
which completely describe the complexes.

2.021 objects form the substance of the world. Therefore they cannot
be compound.

2.0211 if the world had no substance, then whether a proposition had
sense would depend on whether another proposition was true.

2.0212 it would then be impossible to form a picture of the world (true
or false).

2.022 it is clear that however dierent from the real one an imagined
world may be, it must have somethinga formin common
with the real world.

2.023 this xed form consists of the objects.
2.0231
can the substance of the world only determine a form and not

any material properties. For these are rst presented by the

propositionsrst formed by the conguration of the ob jects.

2.0232 roughly speaking: objects are colourless.

2.0233 two objects of the same logical form areapart from their ex-
ternal propertiesonly dierentiated from one another in that
they are dierent.

2.02331 either a thing has properties which no other has, and then one
can distinguish it straight away from the others by a description
and refer to it; or, on the other hand, there are several things
which have the totality of their properties in common, and then
it is quite impossible to point to any one of them.
For if a thing is not distinguished by anything, i cannot dis-
tinguish itfor otherwise it would be distinguished.

2.024 substance is what exists independently of what is the case.

2.025 it is form and content.

2.0251 space, time and colour (colouredness) are forms of objects.

2.026 only if there are ob jects can there be a xed form of the world.

2.027 the xed, the existent and the ob ject are one.

2.0271 the ob ject is the xed, the existent; the conguration is the
changing, the variable.

27
tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.0272 the conguration of the ob jects forms the atomic fact.

2.03 in the atomic fact objects hang one in another, like the members
of a chain.

2.031 in the atomic fact the ob jects are combined in a denite way.

2.032 the way in which objects hang together in the atomic fact is
the structure of the atomic fact.

2.033 the form is the possibility of the structure.

2.034 the structure of the fact consists of the structures of the atomic
facts.

2.04 the totality of existent atomic facts is the world.

2.05 the totality of existent atomic facts also determines which atom-
ic facts do not exist.

2.06 the existence and non-existence of atomic facts is the reality.
(the existence of atomic facts we also call a positive fact,

their non-existence a negative fact. )

2.061 atomic facts are independent of one another.

2.062 from the existence or non-existence of an atomic fact we cannot
infer the existence or non-existence of another.

2.063 the total reality is the world.

2.1 we make to ourselves pictures of facts.

2.11 the picture presents the facts in logical space, the existence and
non-existence of atomic facts.

2.12 the picture is a model of reality.

2.13 to the objects correspond in the picture the elements of the
picture.

2.131 the elements of the picture stand, in the picture, for the objects.

2.14 the picture consists in the fact that its elements are combined
with one another in a denite way.

2.141 the picture is a fact.

2.15 that the elements of the picture are combined with one another
in a denite way, represents that the things are so combined
with one another.

28
tractatus logico-philosophicus

this connexion of the elements of the picture is called its
structure, and the possibility of this structure is called the form
of representation of the picture.

2.151 the form of representation is the possibility that the things are
combined with one another as are the elements of the picture.

2.1511 thus the picture is linked with reality; it reaches up to it.

2.1512 it is like a scale applied to reality.

Touch 2.15121 only the outermost points of the dividing lines the ob ject

to be measured.

2.1513 according to this view the representing relation which makes it
a picture, also belongs to the picture.

2.1514 the representing relation consists of the co-ordinations of the
elements of the picture and the things.

2.1515 these co-ordinations are as it were the feelers of its elements
with which the picture touches reality.

2.16 in order to be a picture a fact must have something in common
with what it pictures.

2.161 in the picture and the pictured there must be something identi-
cal in order that the one can be a picture of the other at all.

2.17 what the picture must have in common with reality in order to
be able to represent it after its mannerrightly or falselyis its
form of representation.

2.171 the picture can represent every reality whose form it has.
The spatial picture, everything spatial, the coloured, every-

thing coloured, etc.

2.172 the picture, however, cannot represent its form of representa-
tion; it shows it forth.

2.173 the picture represents its object from without (its standpoint is
its form of representation), therefore the picture represents its
object rightly or falsely.

2.174 but the picture cannot place itself outside of its form of repre-
sentation.

2.18 what every picture, of whatever form, must have in common

29
tractatus logico-philosophicus

with reality in order to be able to represent it at allrightly or
falselyis the logical form, that is, the form of reality.

2.181 if the form of representation is the logical form, then the picture

2.182 is called a logical picture.

2.19 also every picture is a logical picture. (on the other hand, for
2.2
example, not every picture is spatial. )
2.201
the logical picture can depict the world.
2.202
2.203 the picture has the logical form of representation in common
with what it pictures.
2.21
the picture depicts reality by representing a possibility of the
2.22 existence and non-existence of atomic facts.

2.221 the picture represents a possible state of aairs in logical space.
2.222
the picture contains the possibility of the state of aairs which
2.223 it represents.

2.224 the picture agrees with reality or not; it is right or wrong, true
or false.
2.225
3 the picture represents what it represents, independently of its
3.001 truth or falsehood, through the form of representation.
3.01
3.02 what the picture represents is its sense.

In the agreement or disagreement of its sense with reality, its
truth or falsity consists.

In order to discover whether the picture is true or false we must
compare it with reality.

It cannot be discovered from the picture alone whether it is true
or false.

There is no picture which is a priori true.

The logical picture of the facts is the thought.

An atomic fact is thinkablemeans: we can imagine it.

The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world.

The thought contains the possibility of the state of aairs which
it thinks.

What is thinkable is also possible.

30
tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.03 we cannot think anything unlogical, for otherwise we should
have to think unlogically.

3.031 it used to be said that god could create everything, except what

say was contrary to the laws of logic. The truth is, we could not

of an unlogical world how it would look.

3.032 to present in language anything which contradicts logic is as
impossible as in geometry to present by its co-ordinates a gure
which contradicts the laws of space; or to give the co-ordinates
of a point which does not exist.

3.0321 we could present spatially an atomic fact which contradicted
the laws of physics, but not one which contradicted the laws of
geometry.

3.04 an a priori true thought would be one whose possibility guar-
anteed its truth.

3.05 we could only know a priori that a thought is true if its truth
was to be recognized from the thought itself (without an object
of comparison).

3.1 in the proposition the thought is expressed perceptibly through
the senses.

3.11 we use the sensibly perceptible sign (sound or written sign, etc. )
of the proposition as a pro jection of the possible state of aairs.

The method of pro jection is the thinking of the sense of the
proposition.

3.12 the sign through which we express the thought i call the prop-
ositional sign. And the proposition is the propositional sign in
its pro jective relation to the world.

3.13 to the proposition belongs everything which belongs to the pro-
jection; but not what is projected.

Therefore the possibility of what is pro jected but not this
itself.

In the proposition, therefore, its sense is not yet contained,
but the possibility of expressing it.

(the content of the proposition means the content of the
signicant proposition. )

in the proposition the form of its sense is contained, but not
its content.

31
tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.14 the propositional sign consists in the fact that its elements, the
words, are combined in it in a denite way.

The propositional sign is a fact.

3.141 the proposition is not a mixture of words (just as the musical
theme is not a mixture of tones).

The proposition is articulate.

3.142 only facts can express a sense, a class of names cannot.

3.143 that the propositional sign is a fact is concealed by the ordinary
form of expression, written or printed.

(for in the printed proposition, for example, the sign of a
proposition does not appear essentially dierent from a word.
Thus it was possible for frege to call the proposition a com-
pounded name. )

3.1431 the essential nature of the propositional sign becomes very clear
when we imagine it made up of spatial objects (such as tables,
chairs, books) instead of written signs.

The mutual spatial position of these things then expresses
the sense of the proposition.

3.1432 arb a we must not say, the complex sign `
3.144 ' says ` stands in

r b that a relation
to '; but we must say, ` ' stands in a certain

that b relation to ` ' says arb.

Named states of aairs can be described but not.

(names resemble points; propositions resemble arrows, they
have sense. )

3.2 in propositions thoughts can be so expressed that to the objects
of the thoughts correspond the elements of the propositional
sign.

3.201 these elements i call simple signs and the proposition com-
pletely analysed.

3.202 the simple signs employed in propositions are called names.
3.203
a the name means the object. The object is its meaning. ( is
a the same sign as . )

3.21 to the conguration of the simple signs in the propositional
sign corresponds the conguration of the ob jects in the state of
aairs.

32
tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.22 in the proposition the name represents the ob ject.
3.221
3.23 name objects i can only . Signs represent them. I can only speak
3.24
of assert them how them. I cannot
3.25 . A proposition can only say
3.251
3.26 what a thing is, not it is.
3.261
the postulate of the possibility of the simple signs is the postu-
3.262 late of the determinateness of the sense.
3.263
a proposition about a complex stands in internal relation to the
proposition about its constituent part.

A complex can only be given by its description, and this
will either be right or wrong. The proposition in which there
is mention of a complex, if this does not exist, becomes not
nonsense but simply false.

That a propositional element signies a complex can be seen

from an indeterminateness in the propositions in which it oc-

know curs. We that everything is not yet determined by this

contains proposition. (the notation for generality a prototype. )

the combination of the symbols of a complex in a simple
symbol can be expressed by a denition.

There is one and only one complete analysis of the proposition.

The proposition expresses what it expresses in a denite and
clearly speciable way: the proposition is articulate.

The name cannot be analysed further by any denition. It is a

primitive sign.

Via every dened sign signies those signs by which it is dened,

and the denitions show the way.

Two signs, one a primitive sign, and one dened by primitive

cannot signs, cannot signify in the same way. Names be taken to

pieces by denition (nor any sign which alone and independently

has a meaning).

What does not get expressed in the sign is shown by its appli-
cation. What the signs conceal, their application declares.

The meanings of primitive signs can be explained by elucida-
tions. Elucidations are propositions which contain the primitive
signs. They can, therefore, only be understood when the mean-
ings of these signs are already known.

33
tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.3 only the proposition has sense; only in the context of a propo-
3.31 sition has a name meaning.

3.311 every part of a proposition which characterizes its sense i call
3.312 an expression (a symbol).
3.313
3.314 (the proposition itself is an expression. )
3.315 expressions are everythingessential for the sense of the
propositionthat propositions can have in common with one
3.316 another.
An expression characterizes a form and a content.

An expression presupposes the forms of all propositions in which
it can occur. It is the common characteristic mark of a class of
propositions.

It is therefore represented by the general form of the propositions

which it characterizes.

Constant and in this form the expression is and everything

else variable.

An expression is thus presented by a variable, whose values are
the propositions which contain the expression.

(in the limiting case the variables become constants, the ex-
pression a proposition. )

i call such a variable a propositional variable.

An expression has meaning only in a proposition. Every variable
can be conceived as a propositional variable.

(including the variable name. )

if we change a constituent part of a proposition into a variable,
there is a class of propositions which are all the values of the re-
sulting variable proposition. This class in general still depends
on what, by arbitrary agreement, we mean by parts of that prop-
osition. But if we change all those signs, whose meaning was ar-
bitrarily determined, into variables, there always remains such
a class. But this is now no longer dependent on any agreement;
it depends only on the nature of the proposition. It corresponds
to a logical form, to a logical prototype.

What values the propositional variable can assume is deter-
mined.

34
tractatus logico-philosophicus

is the determination of the values the variable.

3.317 the determination of the values of the propositional variable

3.318 is done by indicating the propositions whose common mark the
3.32
3.321 variable is.
3.322
3.323 the determination is a description of these propositions.

The determination will therefore deal only with symbols not

with their meaning.

Only that it is and
this is essential to the determination,

only a description of symbols and asserts nothing about what is

symbolized.

The way in which we describe the propositions is not essen-
tial.

I conceive the propositionlike frege and russellas a function
of the expressions contained in it.

The sign is the part of the symbol perceptible by the senses.

Two dierent symbols can therefore have the sign (the written
sign or the sound sign) in commonthey then signify in dierent
ways.

It can never indicate the common characteristic of two objects

that we symbolize them with the same signs but by dierent

methods of symbolizing. For the sign is arbitrary. We could

therefore equally well choose two dierent signs and where then

would be what was common in the symbolization.

In the language of everyday life it very often happens that the
same word signies in two dierent waysand therefore belongs
to two dierent symbolsor that two words, which signify in
dierent ways, are apparently applied in the same way in the
proposition.

Thus the word is appears as the copula, as the sign of

equality, and as the expression of existence; to exist as an

intransitive verb like to go; identical as an adjective; we speak

something something of
but also of the fact of happening.

(in the proposition green is greenwhere the rst word is

a proper name and the last an adjectivethese words have not

dierent symbols merely dierent meanings but they are . )

35
tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.324 thus there easily arise the most fundamental confusions (of
3.325 which the whole of philosophy is full).

3.326 in order to avoid these errors, we must employ a symbolism
3.327
3.328 which excludes them, by not applying the same sign in dierent
3.33
3.331 symbols and by not applying signs in the same way which signify
3.332
3.333 in dierent ways. A symbolism, that is to say, which obeys the

logical rules of grammarof logical syntax.

(the logical symbolism of frege and russell is such a lan-
guage, which, however, does still not exclude all errors. )

in order to recognize the symbol in the sign we must consider
the signicant use.

The sign determines a logical form only together with its logical

syntactic application.

Not necessary if a sign is then it is meaningless. That is the

meaning of occam's razor.

(if everything in the symbolism works as though a sign had
meaning, then it has meaning. )

in logical syntax the meaning of a sign ought never to play a

rle; it must admit of being established without mention being

meaning thereby made of the of a sign; it ought to presuppose

only the description of the expressions.

The- from this observation we get a further viewinto russell's
ory of types. Russell's error is shown by the fact that in drawing

up his symbolic rules he has to speak of the meaning of the signs.

No proposition can say anything about itself, because the prop-
ositional sign cannot be contained in itself (that is the whole
theory of types).

A function cannot be its own argument, because the functional

sign already contains the prototype of its own argument and it

cannot contain itself.

F (f x) if, for example, we suppose that the function could

be its own argument, then there would be a proposition

f (f (f x)) f
, and in this the outer function and the inner

f function must have dierent meanings; for the inner has

the form (f x), the outer the form ((f x)). Common to

36
tractatus logico-philosophicus

f both functions is only the letter , which by itself signies

nothing.

F (f (u)) () : this is at once clear, if instead of
we write

f (u) . U = f u.

Herewith russell's paradox vanishes.

3.334 the rules of logical syntax must follow of themselves, if we only
know how every single sign signies.

3.34 a proposition possesses essential and accidental features.
Accidental are the features which are due to a particular way

of producing the propositional sign. Essential are those which
alone enable the proposition to express its sense.

3.341 the essential in a proposition is therefore that which is common
to all propositions which can express the same sense.

And in the same way in general the essential in a symbol is
that which all symbols which can full the same purpose have
in common.

3.3411 one could therefore say the real name is that which all symbols,
3.342
which signify an ob ject, have in common. It would then follow,

step by step, that no sort of composition was essential for a

name.

This in our notations there is indeed something arbitrary, but

if is not arbitrary, namely that we have determined anything

must arbitrarily, then something else be the case. (this results

essence from the of the notation. )

3.3421 a particular method of symbolizing may be unimportant, but it

possible is always important that this is a method of symboliz-

ing. And this happens as a rule in philosophy: the single thing

proves over and over again to be unimportant, but the possibil-

ity of every single thing reveals something about the nature of

the world.

3.343 denitions are rules for the translation of one language into

another. Every correct symbolism must be translatable into

this every other according to such rules. It is which all have in

common.

37
tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.344 what signies in the symbol is what is common to all those
symbols by which it can be replaced according to the rules of
logical syntax.

3.3441 we can, for example, express what is common to all notations

for the truth-functions as follows: it is common to them that

can be replaced they all, for example, p by the notations of

p p q p q (not ) and
( or ).

(herewith is indicated the way in which a special possible
notation can give us general information. )

3.3442 the sign of the complex is not arbitrarily resolved in the analysis,
in such a way that its resolution would be dierent in every
propositional structure.

3.4 the proposition determines a place in logical space: the exis-
tence of this logical place is guaranteed by the existence of the
constituent parts alone, by the existence of the signicant prop-
osition.

3.41 the propositional sign and the logical co-ordinates: that is the
logical place.

3.411 the geometrical and the logical place agree in that each is the
possibility of an existence.

3.42 although a proposition may only determine one place in logical
space, the whole logical space must already be given by it.

(otherwise denial, the logical sum, the logical product, etc. ,
would always introduce new elementsin co-ordination. )

(the logical scaolding round the picture determines the log-
ical space. The proposition reaches through the whole logical
space. )

3.5 the applied, thought, propositional sign is the thought.

4 the thought is the signicant proposition.

4.001 the totality of propositions is the language.

4.002 man possesses the capacity of constructing languages, in which
every sense can be expressed, without having an idea how and
what each word meansjust as one speaks without knowing how
the single sounds are produced.

38
tractatus logico-philosophicus

colloquial language is a part of the human organism and is
not less complicated than it.

From it it is humanly impossible to gather immediately the
logic of language.

Language disguises the thought; so that from the external
form of the clothes one cannot infer the form of the thought they
clothe, because the external form of the clothes is constructed
with quite another object than to let the form of the body be
recognized.

The silent adjustments to understand colloquial language are
enormously complicated.

4.003 most propositions and questions, that have been written about
philosophical matters, are not false, but senseless. We can-
not, therefore, answer questions of this kind at all, but only
state their senselessness. Most questions and propositions of
the philosophers result from the fact that we do not understand
the logic of our language.

(they are of the same kind as the question whether the good
is more or less identical than the beautiful. )

and so it is not to be wondered at that the deepest problems

no are really problems.

4.0031 all philosophy is critique of language (but not at all in mauth-
ner's sense). Russell's merit is to have shown that the apparent
logical form of the proposition need not be its real form.

4.01 the proposition is a picture of reality.
The proposition is a model of the reality as we think it is.

4.011 at the rst glance the propositionsay as it stands printed on
4.012 paperdoes not seem to be a picture of the reality of which it
treats. But nor does the musical score appear at rst sight to
be a picture of a musical piece; nor does our phonetic spelling
(letters) seem to be a picture of our spoken language. And yet
these symbolisms prove to be pictureseven in the ordinary
sense of the wordof what they represent.

Arb it is obvious that we perceive a proposition of the form as

a picture. Here the sign is obviously a likeness of the signied.

4.013 and if we penetrate to the essence of this pictorial nature we

39
tractatus logico-philosophicus

apparent irregularities see that this is not disturbed by (like the

use of and in the score).

For these irregularities also picture what they are to express;
only in another way.

4.014 the gramophone record, the musical thought, the score, the
waves of sound, all stand to one another in that pictorial internal
relation, which holds between language and the world. To all of
them the logical structure is common.

(like the two youths, their two horses and their lilies in the
story. They are all in a certain sense one. )

4.0141 in the fact that there is a general rule by which the musician is
able to read the symphony out of the score, and that there is
a rule by which one could reconstruct the symphony from the
line on a gramophone record and from this againby means
of the rst ruleconstruct the score, herein lies the internal
similarity between these things which at rst sight seem to be
entirely dierent. And the rule is the law of projection which
projects the symphony into the language of the musical score.
It is the rule of translation of this language into the language of
the gramophone record.

4.015 the possibility of all similes, of all the imagery of our language,
rests on the logic of representation.

4.016 in order to understand the essence of the proposition, consider
hieroglyphic writing, which pictures the facts it describes.

And from it came the alphabet without the essence of the
representation being lost.

4.02 this we see from the fact that we understand the sense of the
propositional sign, without having had it explained to us.

4.021 the proposition is a picture of reality, for i know the state of
4.022
aairs presented by it, if i understand the proposition. And i

understand the proposition, without its sense having been ex-

plained to me.

Shows the proposition its sense.

Shows if the proposition
how things stand, it is true. And

says it , that they do so stand.

40
tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.023 the proposition determines reality to this extent, that one only
needs to say yes or no to it to make it agree with reality.
4.024
4.025 it must therefore be completely described by the proposition.
4.026 a proposition is the description of a fact.
4.027 as the description of an object describes it by its external
4.03 properties so propositions describe reality by its internal prop-
4.031 erties.
The proposition constructs a world with the help of a logical
scaolding, and therefore one can actually see in the proposition
all the logical features possessed by reality if it is true. One can

draw conclusions from a false proposition.

To understand a proposition means to know what is the case, if
it is true.

(one can therefore understand it without knowing whether
it is true or not. )

one understands it if one understands its constituent parts.

The translation of one language into another is not a process
of translating each proposition of the one into a proposition of
the other, but only the constituent parts of propositions are
translated.

(and the dictionary does not only translate substantives but
also adverbs and conjunctions, etc. , and it treats them all alike. )

the meanings of the simple signs (the words) must be explained
to us, if we are to understand them.

By means of propositions we explain ourselves.

New it is essential to propositions, that they can communicate a

sense to us.

A proposition must communicate a new sense with old words.

The proposition communicates to us a state of aairs, there-

essentially fore it must be connected with the state of aairs.

And the connexion is, in fact, that it is its logical picture.

The proposition only asserts something, in so far as it is a
picture.

In the proposition a state of aairs is, as it were, put together
for the sake of experiment.

41
tractatus logico-philosophicus

one can say, instead of, this proposition has such and such
a sense, this proposition represents such and such a state of
aairs.

4.0311 one name stands for one thing, and another for another thing,
and they are connected together. And so the whole, like a living
picture, presents the atomic fact.

4.0312 the possibility of propositions is based upon the principle of the
representation of objects by signs.

My fundamental thought is that the logical constants do

logic not represent. That the of the facts cannot be represented.

4.032 the proposition is a picture of its state of aairs, only in so far
as it is logically articulated.

(even the proposition ambulo is composite, for its stem
gives a dierent sense with another termination, or its termina-
tion with another stem. )

4.04 in the proposition there must be exactly as many things distin-
guishable as there are in the state of aairs, which it represents.

They must both possess the same logical (mathematical)
multiplicity (cf. Hertz's mechanics, on dynamic models).

4.041 this mathematical multiplicity naturally cannot in its turn be
represented. One cannot get outside it in the representation.

4.0411 (x). F x if we tried, for example, to express what is expressed by

f x f x by putting an index before
, like: gen. , it would not do,

we should not know what was generalized. If we tried to show

g f (x ) it by an index , like:
g it would not dowe should not

know the scope of the generalization.

If we were to try it by introducing a mark in the argument

(g, g) . F (g, g) places, like , it would not dowe could not

determine the identity of the variables, etc.

All these ways of symbolizing are inadequate because they
have not the necessary mathematical multiplicity.

4.0412 for the same reason the idealist explanation of the seeing of spa-
tial relations through spatial spectacles does not do, because
it cannot explain the multiplicity of these relations.

4.05 reality is compared with the proposition.

42
tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.06 propositions can be true or false only by being pictures of the
reality.

4.061 if one does not observe that propositions have a sense inde-
pendent of the facts, one can easily believe that true and false
are two relations between signs and things signied with equal
rights.

P one could then, for example, say that signies in the true
p way what signies in the false way, etc.

4.062 can we not make ourselves understood by means of false propo-
4.0621
sitions as hitherto with true ones, so long as we know that they

are meant to be false? No! For a proposition is true, if what

p p we assert by means of it is the case; and if by we mean ,

p and what we mean is the case, then in the new conception

is true and not false.

P p can that, however, the signs and say the same thing is

important, for it shows that the sign corresponds to nothing

in reality.

That negation occurs in a proposition, is no characteristic of

its sense (p = p).
P p the propositions and have opposite senses, but to

them corresponds one and the same reality.

4.063 an illustration to explain the concept of truth. A black spot on
white paper; the form of the spot can be described by saying
of each point of the plane whether it is white or black. To the
fact that a point is black corresponds a positive fact; to the fact
that a point is white (not black), a negative fact. If i indicate
a point of the plane (a truth-value in frege's terminology), this
corresponds to the assumption proposed for judgment, etc. Etc.

But to be able to say that a point is black or white, i must
rst know under what conditions a point is called white or black;

p in order to be able to say is true (or false) i must have
p determined under what conditions i call true, and thereby i

determine the sense of the proposition.

The point at which the simile breaks down is this: we can
indicate a point on the paper, without knowing what white and
black are; but to a proposition without a sense corresponds noth-
ing at all, for it signies no thing (truth-value) whose properties

43
tractatus logico-philosophicus

are called false or true; the verb of the proposition is not is

true or is falseas frege thoughtbut that which is true

must already contain the verb.

4.064 already every proposition must have a sense; assertion cannot

give it a sense, for what it asserts is the sense itself. And the

same holds of denial, etc.

4.0641 one could say, the denial is already related to the logical place

determined by the proposition that is denied.

Other the denying proposition determines a logical place

than does the proposition denied.

The denying proposition determines a logical place, with the
help of the logical place of the proposition denied, by saying that
it lies outside the latter place.

That one can deny again the denied proposition, shows that
what is denied is already a proposition and not merely the pre-
liminary to a proposition.

4.1 a proposition presents the existence and non-existence of atomic
facts.

4.11 the totality of true propositions is the total natural science (or
the totality of the natural sciences).

4.111 philosophy is not one of the natural sciences.
(the word philosophy must mean something which stands

above or below, but not beside the natural sciences. )

4.112 the object of philosophy is the logical clarication of thoughts.
Philosophy is not a theory but an activity.
A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations.
The result of philosophy is not a number of philosophical

propositions, but to make propositions clear.
Philosophy should make clear and delimit sharply the

thoughts which otherwise are, as it were, opaque and blurred.

4.1121 psychology is no nearer related to philosophy, than is any other
natural science.

The theory of knowledge is the philosophy of psychology.

Does not my study of sign-language correspond to the study
of thought processes which philosophers held to be so essential

44
tractatus logico-philosophicus

to the philosophy of logic? Only they got entangled for the most
part in unessential psychological investigations, and there is an
analogous danger for my method.

4.1122 the darwinian theory has no more to do with philosophy than
has any other hypothesis of natural science.

4.113 philosophy limits the disputable sphere of natural science.

4.114 it should limit the thinkable and thereby the unthinkable.
It should limit the unthinkable from within through the

thinkable.

4.115 it will mean the unspeakable by clearly displaying the speakable.

4.116 everything that can be thought at all can be thought clearly.
Everything that can be said can be said clearly.

4.12 propositions can represent the whole reality, but they cannot
represent what they must have in common with reality in order
to be able to represent itthe logical form.

To be able to represent the logical form, we should have to
be able to put ourselves with the propositions outside logic, that
is outside the world.

4.121 propositions cannot represent the logical form: this mirrors itself
in the propositions.

That which mirrors itself in language, language cannot rep-

resent.

Itself we that which expresses
in language, cannot express

by language.

Show the propositions the logical form of reality.

They exhibit it.

4.1211 f a a thus a proposition shows that in its sense the object
f a ga occurs, two propositions and that they are both about

the same object.

If two propositions contradict one another, this is shown by

their structure; similarly if one follows from another, etc.

4.1212 can cannot what
be shown be said.

4.1213 now we understand our feeling that we are in possession of the
right logical conception, if only all is right in our symbolism.

45
tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.122 we can speak in a certain sense of formal properties of objects
and atomic facts, or of properties of the structure of facts, and
in the same sense of formal relations and relations of structures.

(instead of property of the structure i also say internal prop-
erty; instead of relation of structures internal relation.

I introduce these expressions in order to show the reason
for the confusion, very widespread among philosophers, between
internal relations and proper (external) relations. )

the holding of such internal properties and relations cannot,
however, be asserted by propositions, but it shows itself in the
propositions, which present the atomic facts and treat of the
objects in question.

4.1221 an internal property of a fact we also call a feature of this fact.
(in the sense in which we speak of facial features. )

4.123 a property is internal if it is unthinkable that its ob ject does
not possess it.

(this blue colour and that stand in the internal relation of

these brighter and darker eo ipso. It is unthinkable that two

objects should not stand in this relation. )

(here to the shifting use of the words property and rela-
tion there corresponds the shifting use of the word object. )

4.124 the existence of an internal property of a possible state of aairs
is not expressed by a proposition, but it expresses itself in the
proposition which presents that state of aairs, by an internal
property of this proposition.

It would be as senseless to ascribe a formal property to a
proposition as to deny it the formal property.

4.1241 one cannot distinguish forms from one another by saying that
one has this property but the other that: for this assumes that
there is a sense in asserting either property of either form.

4.125 the existence of an internal relation between possible states of
aairs expresses itself in language by an internal relation be-
tween the propositions presenting them.

4.1251 here the disputed question whether all relations are internal or
external disappears.

46
tractatus logico-philosophicus

internal 4.1252 series which are ordered by relations i call formal series.

The series of numbers is ordered not by an external, but by

an internal relation.

Arb similarly the series of propositions ,

"(x) : arx . Xrb,
"(x, y) : arx . Ary . Yrb, etc.

B a b (if stands in one of these relations to , i call a successor
a of . )

4.126 in the sense in which we speak of formal properties we can now
speak also of formal concepts.

(i introduce this expression in order to make clear the confu-
sion of formal concepts with proper concepts which runs through
the whole of the old logic. )

that anything falls under a formal concept as an ob ject be-
longing to it, cannot be expressed by a proposition. But it shows
itself in the sign of this object itself. (the name shows that it
signies an ob ject, the numerical sign that it signies a number,
etc. )

formal concepts cannot, like proper concepts, be presented
by a function.

For their characteristics, the formal properties, are not ex-
pressed by the functions.

The expression of a formal property is a feature of certain
symbols.

The sign that signies the characteristics of a formal con-
cept is, therefore, a characteristic feature of all symbols, whose
meanings fall under the concept.

The expression of the formal concept is therefore a proposi-
tional variable in which only this characteristic feature is con-
stant.

4.127 the propositional variable signies the formal concept, and its
values signify the objects which fall under this concept.

4.1271 every variable is the sign of a formal concept.
For every variable presents a constant form, which all its

values possess, and which can be conceived as a formal property
of these values.

47
tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.1272 x so the variable name is the proper sign of the pseudo-concept

object.

Wherever the word ob ject (thing, entity, etc. ) is rightly
used, it is expressed in logical symbolism by the variable name.

For example in the proposition there are two objects which

. . . , by (x, y) . . . .

I. E. Wherever it is used otherwise, as a proper concept word,

there arise senseless pseudo-propositions.

E. G. So one cannot, say there are ob jects as one says there

are books. Nor there are 100 objects or there are 0 ob-

number of all objects jects. And it is senseless to speak of the.

The same holds of the words complex, fact, function,
number, etc.

They all signify formal concepts and are presented in logical
symbolism by variables, not by functions or classes (as frege
and russell thought).

Expressions like 1 is a number, there is only one number
nought, and all like them are senseless.

(it is as senseless to say, there is only one 1 as it would be
to say: 2 + 2 is at 3 o'clock equal to 4. )

4.12721 the formal concept is already given with an ob ject, which falls

under it. One cannot, therefore, introduce both, the objects

and which fall under a formal concept the formal concept it-

e. G. Self, as primitive ideas. One cannot, therefore, introduce

(as russell does) the concept of function and also special func-

tions as primitive ideas; or the concept of number and denite

numbers.

4.1273 if we want to express in logical symbolism the general propo-

b a sition is a successor of we need for this an expression for
the general term of the formal series: arb, (x) : arx . Xrb,
(x, y) : arx . Xry . Yrb, . . . The general term of a formal series

can only be expressed by a variable, for the concept symbolized

formal by term of this formal series is a concept. (this frege

and russell overlooked; the way in which they express general

propositions like the above is, therefore, false; it contains a vi-

cious circle. )

we can determine the general term of the formal series by

48
tractatus logico-philosophicus

giving its rst term and the general form of the operation, which
generates the following term out of the preceding proposition.

4.1274 the question about the existence of a formal concept is senseless.
For no proposition can answer such a question.

(for example, one cannot ask: are there unanalysable sub-

ject-predicate propositions? )

4.128 anumerical the logical forms are.

Therefore there are in logic no pre-eminent numbers, and
therefore there is no philosophical monism or dualism, etc.

4.2 the sense of a proposition is its agreement and disagreement
with the possibilities of the existence and non-existence of the
atomic facts.

4.21 the simplest proposition, the elementary proposition, asserts
the existence of an atomic fact.

4.211 it is a sign of an elementary proposition, that no elementary
proposition can contradict it.

4.22 the elementary proposition consists of names. It is a connexion,
a concatenation, of names.

4.221 it is obvious that in the analysis of propositions we must come
to elementary propositions, which consist of names in immediate
combination.

The question arises here, how the propositional connexion
comes to be.

4.2211 even if the world is innitely complex, so that every fact consists
of an innite number of atomic facts and every atomic fact is
composed of an innite number of objects, even then there must
be objects and atomic facts.

4.23 the name occurs in the proposition only in the context of the
elementary proposition.

4.24 the names are the simple symbols, i indicate them by single

x y z letters ( , , ).

The elementary proposition i write as function of the names,

in the form f x, (x, y), etc.
P q r or i indicate it by the letters , , .

49
tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.241 if i use two signs with one and the same meaning, i express this

4.242 by putting between them the sign =.
4.243
a = b a
4.25 means then, that the sign is replaceable by the
4.26
4.27 b sign .
4.28
4.3 b (if i introduce by an equation a new sign , by determining

a that it shall replace a previously known sign , i write the

a = b equationdenition(like russell) in the form def.. A

denition is a symbolic rule. )

a = b expressions of the form are therefore only expedients

in presentation: they assert nothing about the meaning of the

a b signs and .

Can we understand two names without knowing whether they
signify the same thing or two dierent things? Can we under-
stand a proposition in which two names occur, without knowing
if they mean the same or dierent things?

If i know the meaning of an english and a synonymous ger-

man word, it is impossible for me not to know that they are

synonymous, it is impossible for me not to be able to translate

them into one another.

A = a expressions like , or expressions deduced from these

are neither elementary propositions nor otherwise signicant

signs. (this will be shown later. )

if the elementary proposition is true, the atomic fact exists; if it
is false the atomic fact does not exist.

The specication of all true elementary propositions describes
the world completely. The world is completely described by the
specication of all elementary propositions plus the specication,
which of them are true and which false.

N k = with regard to the existence of atomic facts there are n
n
n
possibilities.
=0

it is possible for all combinations of atomic facts to exist,
and the others not to exist.

To these combinations correspond the same number of possibili-

n ties of the truthand falsehoodof elementary propositions.

The truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions mean the

50
tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.31 possibilities of the existence and non-existence of the atomic
facts.

The truth-possibilities can be presented by schemata of the fol-
lowing kind (t means true, f false. The rows of t's and
f's under the row of the elementary propositions mean their
truth-possibilities in an easily intelligible symbolism).

Pq r pq p

ttt tt t

ftt ft f

tft tf

ttf ff

fft

ftf

tff

fff

4.4 a proposition is the expression of agreement and disagreement
4.41 with the truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions.
4.411
the truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions are the
4.42 conditions of the truth and falsehood of the propositions.
4.43
4.431 it seems probable even at rst sight that the introduction of the

elementary propositions is fundamental for the comprehension of

the other kinds of propositions. Indeed the comprehension of the

palpably general propositions depends on that of the elementary

propositions.

With regard to the agreement and disagreement of a proposition

n with the truth-possibilities of elementary propositions there

kn kn = ln possibilities.

Are

=0

agreement with the truth-possibilities can be expressed by co-
ordinating with them in the schema the mark t (true).

Absence of this mark means disagreement.

The expression of the agreement and disagreement with the
truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions expresses the
truth-conditions of the proposition.

51
tractatus logico-philosophicus

the proposition is the expression of its truth-conditions.

(frege has therefore quite rightly put them at the beginning,

as explaining the signs of his logical symbolism. Only frege's

explanation of the truth-concept is false: if the true and the

p false were real objects and the arguments in , etc. , then

p the sense of would by no means be determined by frege's

determination. )

4.44 the sign which arises from the co-ordination of that mark t
4.441 with the truth-possibilities is a propositional sign.
4.442
it is clear that to the complex of the signs f and t no object
4.45 (or complex of ob jects) corresponds; any more than to horizontal
and vertical lines or to brackets. There are no logical objects.

Something analogous holds of course for all signs, which ex-
press the same as the schemata of t and f.

Thus e. G.

P q

ttt

ftt

tf
f f t

is a propositional sign.

(frege's assertion sign is logically altogether meaningless;

in frege (and russell) it only shows that these authors hold as
true the propositions marked in this way.

Belongs therefore to the propositions no more than does

the number of the proposition. A proposition cannot possibly
assert of itself that it is true. )

if the sequence of the truth-possibilities in the schema is once
for all determined by a rule of combination, then the last column
is by itself an expression of the truth-conditions. If we write this

p q column as a row the propositional sign becomes: (ttt)( , ),
p q or more plainly: (ttft)( , ).

(the number of places in the left-hand bracket is determined
by the number of terms in the right-hand bracket. )

n l for
elementary propositions there are n possible groups of

truth-conditions.

52
tractatus logico-philosophicus

the groups of truth-conditions which belong to the truth-
possibilities of a number of elementary propositions can be or-
dered in a series.

4.46 among the possible groups of truth-conditions there are two
extreme cases.

In the one case the proposition is true for all the truth-pos-

sibilities of the elementary propositions. We say that the truth-

conditions are tautological.

In the second case the proposition is false for all the truth-

self-contradictory possibilities. The truth-conditions are .

In the rst case we call the proposition a tautology, in the
second case a contradiction.

4.461 the proposition shows what it says, the tautology and the con-
tradiction that they say nothing.

The tautology has no truth-conditions, for it is uncondition-
ally true; and the contradiction is on no condition true.

Tautology and contradiction are without sense.

(like the point from which two arrows go out in opposite

directions. )

e. G. (i know, nothing about the weather, when i know that

it rains or does not rain. )

4.4611 tautology and contradiction are, however, not senseless; they
are part of the symbolism, in the same way that 0 is part of
the symbolism of arithmetic.

4.462 tautology and contradiction are not pictures of the reality. They

every present no possible state of aairs. For the one allows

none possible state of aairs, the other.

In the tautology the conditions of agreement with the world
the presenting relationscancel one another, so that it stands
in no presenting relation to reality.

4.463 the truth-conditions determine the range, which is left to the
facts by the proposition.

(the proposition, the picture, the model, are in a negative
sense like a solid body, which restricts the free movement of
another: in a positive sense, like the space limited by solid sub-
stance, in which a body may be placed. )

53
tractatus logico-philosophicus

tautology leaves to reality the whole innite logical space;
contradiction lls the whole logical space and leaves no point to
reality. Neither of them, therefore, can in any way determine
reality.

4.464 the truth of tautology is certain, of propositions possible, of
contradiction impossible. (certain, possible, impossible: here
we have an indication of that gradation which we need in the
theory of probability. )

4.465 the logical product of a tautology and a proposition says the
same as the proposition. Therefore that product is identical
with the proposition. For the essence of the symbol cannot be
altered without altering its sense.

4.466 to a denite logical combination of signs corresponds a denite

every arbitrary logical combination of their meanings; combina-

tion only corresponds to the unconnected signs.

That is, propositions which are true for every state of aairs

cannot be combinations of signs at all, for otherwise there could

only correspond to them denite combinations of ob jects.

No (and to no logical combination corresponds combination

of the objects. )

tautology and contradiction are the limiting cases of the
combinations of symbols, namely their dissolution.

4.4661 of course the signs are also combined with one another in the

i. E. Tautology and contradiction, they stand in relations to one

another, but these relations are meaningless, unessential to the

symbol.

4.5 now it appears to be possible to give the most general form of

i. E. Proposition; to give a description of the propositions of some

one sign language, so that every possible sense can be expressed

by a symbol, which falls under the description, and so that every

symbol which falls under the description can express a sense, if

the meanings of the names are chosen accordingly.

It is clear that in the description of the most general form

only of proposition what is essential to it may be described

otherwise it would not be the most general form.

That there is a general form is proved by the fact that there

54
tractatus logico-philosophicus

cannot be a proposition whose form could not have been foreseen

i. E. ( constructed). The general form of proposition is: such and

such is the case.

4.51 all suppose elementary propositions were given me: then we
4.52
4.53 can simply ask: what propositions i can build out of them. And
5
5.01 all so these are
5.02 propositions and are they limited.

5.1 the propositions are everything which follows from the totality

of all elementary propositions (of course also from the fact that

totality of them all it is the ). (so, in some sense, one could

all say, that propositions are generalizations of the elementary

propositions. )

the general propositional form is a variable.

Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions.
(an elementary proposition is a truth-function of itself. )

the elementary propositions are the truth-arguments of propo-
sitions.

It is natural to confuse the arguments of functions with the

indices of names. For i recognize the meaning of the sign con-

taining it from the argument just as much as from the index.

+ c in russell's c, for example, is an index which indicates

that the whole sign is the addition sign for cardinal numbers.

But this way of symbolizing depends on arbitrary agreement,

+ p and one could choose a simple sign instead of c: but in

p p cannot is not an index but an argument; the sense of

p be understood, unless the sense of has previously been un-

derstood. (in the name julius csar, julius is an index. The

index is always part of a description of the ob ject to whose name

e. G. The we attach it, csar of the julian gens. )

the confusion of argument and index is, if i am not mistaken,
at the root of frege's theory of the meaning of propositions and
functions. For frege the propositions of logic were names and
their arguments the indices of these names.

The truth-functions can be ordered in series.
That is the foundation of the theory of probability.

55
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.101 the truth-functions of every number of elementary propositions
can be written in a schema of the following kind:

(tttt)(p, q) tautology (if p then p, and if q then q) [p p . Q q]

(fttt)(p, q) in words: not both p and q. [(p . Q)]

(tftt)(p, q) if q then p. [q p]

(ttft)(p, q) if p then q. [p q]

(tttf)(p, q) p or q. [p q]

(fftt)(p, q) not q. [q]

(ftft)(p, q) not p. [p]

(fttf)(p, q) p or q, but not both. [p . Q : : q . P]

(tfft)(p, q) if p, then q; and if q, then p. [p q]

(tftf)(p, q) p

(ttff)(p, q) q

(ffft)(p, q) neither p nor q. [p . Q or p | q]

(fftf)(p, q) p and not q. [p . Q]

(ftff)(p, q) q and not p. [q . P]

(tfff)(p, q) p and q. [p . Q]

(ffff)(p, q) contradiction (p and not p; and q and not q. ) [p . P . Q . Q]

those truth-possibilities of its truth-arguments, which verify

truth-grounds the proposition, i shall call its.

5.11 if the truth-grounds which are common to a number of proposi-
tions are all also truth-grounds of some one proposition, we say
5.12 that the truth of this proposition follows from the truth of those
5.121 propositions.
5.122
p in particular the truth of a proposition follows from that of a
q proposition , if all the truth-grounds of the second are truth-

grounds of the rst.

Q p p the truth-grounds of
are contained in those of ; follows

q from .

P q p q if follows from , the sense of is contained in that of .

5.123 if a god creates a world in which certain propositions are true, he
creates thereby also a world in which all propositions consequent
on them are true. And similarly he could not create a world in

p which the proposition is true without creating all its objects.

5.124 a proposition asserts every proposition which follows from it.

5.1241 p . Q p
is one of the propositions which assert and at the same

q time one of the propositions which assert .

56
tractatus logico-philosophicus

two propositions are opposed to one another if there is no
signicant proposition which asserts them both.

Every proposition which contradicts another, denies it.

5.13 that the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of other
propositions, we perceive from the structure of the propositions.

5.131 if the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others,
this expresses itself in relations in which the forms of these prop-
ositions stand to one another, and we do not need to put them
in these relations rst by connecting them with one another in
a proposition; for these relations are internal, and exist as soon
as, and by the very fact that, the propositions exist.

5.1311 p q p q when we conclude from
and to the relation between

p q p the forms of the propositions
and is here concealed

e. G. By the method of symbolizing. But if we write, instead of

p q p | q . | . P | q and instead of p p | p (p | q = neither

p q nor ), then the inner connexion becomes obvious.

F a (x) . F x (the fact that we can infer
from shows that gen-

(x) . F x erality is present also in the symbol .

5.132 p q q p p q if follows from , i can conclude from to ; infer from .

The method of inference is to be understood from the two
propositions alone.

Only they themselves can justify the inference.

Laws of inference, whichas in frege and russellare to
justify the conclusions, are senseless and would be superuous.

5.133 all inference takes place a priori.

5.134 from an elementary proposition no other can be inferred.

5.135 in no way can an inference be made from the existence of one
state of aairs to the existence of another entirely dierent from
it.

5.136 there is no causal nexus which justies such an inference.
5.1361
cannot the events of the future be inferred from those of the

present.

Superstition is the belief in the causal nexus.

5.1362 the freedom of the will consists in the fact that future actions

57
tractatus logico-philosophicus

cannot be known now. We could only know them if causality

inner were an necessity, like that of logical deduction. The

connexion of knowledge and what is known is that of logical

necessity.

P p (a knows that is the case is senseless if is a tautology. )

5.1363 if from the fact that a proposition is obvious to us it does not

follow that it is true, then obviousness is no justication for our

belief in its truth.

5.14 if a proposition follows from another, then the latter says more
5.141 than the former, the former less than the latter.

P q q p if follows from and from then they are one and the same

proposition.

5.142 a tautology follows from all propositions: it says nothing.
5.143
no contradiction is something shared by propositions, which
5.15
5.151 proposition has in common with another. Tautology is that
which is shared by all propositions, which have nothing in com-
mon with one another.

Contradiction vanishes so to speak outside, tautology inside
all propositions.

Contradiction is the external limit of the propositions, tau-
tology their substanceless centre.

T r if r is the number of the truth-grounds of the proposition ,

t s rs the number of those truth-grounds of the proposition

r which are at the same time truth-grounds of , then we call

probability t : t the ratio rs
r the measure of the which the prop-

r s osition gives to the proposition .

T suppose in a schema like that above in no. 5.101 r is the num-
r t ber of the t 's in the proposition , rs the number of those
s t 's in the proposition , which stand in the same columns as

r r t 's of the proposition ; then the proposition gives to the

s t : t proposition the probability rsr.

5.1511 there is no special object peculiar to probability propositions.

5.152 propositions which have no truth-arguments in common with
one another we call independent.

58
tractatus logico-philosophicus

e. G. Independent propositions ( any two elementary proposi-

1
tions) give to one another the probability 2 .

P q q if follows from , the proposition gives to the proposition

p the probability 1. The certainty of logical conclusion is a

limiting case of probability.

(application to tautology and contradiction. )

5.153 a proposition is in itself neither probable nor improbable. An
5.154 event occurs or does not occur, there is no middle course.

5.155 in an urn there are equal numbers of white and black balls (and
5.156
no others). I draw one ball after another and put them back in

the urn. Then i can determine by the experiment that the num-

bers of the black and white balls which are drawn approximate

as the drawing continues.

This so is not a mathematical fact.

If then, i say, it is equally probable that i should draw a
white and a black ball, this means, all the circumstances known
to me (including the natural laws hypothetically assumed) give
to the occurrence of the one event no more probability than to
the occurrence of the other. That is they giveas can easily be
understood from the above explanationsto each the probabil-

1
ity 2 .

What i can verify by the experiment is that the occurrence of
the two events is independent of the circumstances with which
i have no closer acquaintance.

The unit of the probability proposition is: the circumstances
with which i am not further acquaintedgive to the occurrence
of a denite event such and such a degree of probability.

Probability is a generalization.

It involves a general description of a propositional form. Only
in default of certainty do we need probability.

If we are not completely acquainted with a fact, but know

something about its form.

(a proposition can, indeed, be an incomplete picture of a

a certain state of aairs, but it is always complete picture. )

the probability proposition is, as it were, an extract from
other propositions.

59
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.2 the structures of propositions stand to one another in internal
relations.

5.21 we can bring out these internal relations in our manner of ex-
pression, by presenting a proposition as the result of an opera-
tion which produces it from other propositions (the bases of the
operation).

5.22 the operation is the expression of a relation between the struc-
tures of its result and its bases.

5.23 the operation is that which must happen to a proposition in
order to make another out of it.

5.231 and that will naturally depend on their formal properties, on
the internal similarity of their forms.

5.232 the internal relation which orders a series is equivalent to the
operation by which one term arises from another.

5.233 the rst place in which an operation can occur is where a prop-

i. E. Osition arises from another in a logically signicant way;

where the logical construction of the proposition begins.

5.234 the truth-functions of elementary propositions, are results of
operations which have the elementary propositions as bases. (i
call these operations, truth-operations. )

p p 5.2341 the sense of a truth-function of is a function of the sense of .

Denial, logical addition, logical multiplication, etc. Etc. , are
operations.

(denial reverses the sense of a proposition. )

5.24 an operation shows itself in a variable; it shows how we can
proceed from one form of proposition to another.

It gives expression to the dierence between the forms.
(and that which is common to the bases, and the result of
an operation, is the bases themselves. )

5.241 the operation does not characterize a form but only the dier-
5.242 ence between forms.

Q p r the same operation which makes from , makes from
q , and so on. This can only be expressed by the fact that
p q r , , , etc. , are variables which give general expression to

certain formal relations.

60
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.25 the occurrence of an operation does not characterize the sense
of a proposition.

For an operation does not assert anything; only its result
does, and this depends on the bases of the operation.

(operation and function must not be confused with one an-
other. )

5.251 a function cannot be its own argument, but the result of an
operation can be its own basis.

5.252 only in this way is the progress from term to term in a formal
series possible (from type to type in the hierarchy of russell
and whitehead). (russell and whitehead have not admitted
the possibility of this progress but have made use of it all the
same. )

5.2521 the repeated application of an operation to its own result i call

o o o a its successive application ( is the result of the threefold
o a successive application of to ).

In a similar sense i speak of the successive application of

several operations to a number of propositions.

,
5.2522 a, o a, o o a . . . . The general term of the formal series i write

a x o x thus: [ , , ]. This expression in brackets is a variable. The

rst term of the expression is the beginning of the formal series,

x the second the form of an arbitrary term of the series, and

the third the form of that term of the series which immediately

x follows .

5.2523 the concept of the successive application of an operation is
equivalent to the concept and so on.

5.253 one operation can reverse the eect of another. Operations can
5.254
cancel one another.

E. G. Operations can vanish ( denial in p, p = p).

5.3 all propositions are results of truth-operations on the elemen-
tary propositions.

The truth-operation is the way in which a truth-function
arises from elementary propositions.

According to the nature of truth-operations, in the same way
as out of elementary propositions arise their truth-functions,

61
tractatus logico-philosophicus

from truth-functions arises a new one. Every truth-operation

creates from truth-functions of elementary propositions another

i. E. Truth-function of elementary propositions, a proposition.

The result of every truth-operation on the results of truth-oper-

one ations on elementary propositions is also the result of truth-

operation on elementary propositions.

Every proposition is the result of truth-operations on ele-
mentary propositions.

5.31 p q r the schemata no. 4.31 are also signicant, if , , , etc.
5.32
5.4 are not elementary propositions.
5.41
5.42 and it is easy to see that the propositional sign in no. 4.442

5.43 expresses one truth-function of elementary propositions even

p q when and are truth-functions of elementary propositions.

All truth-functions are results of the successive application of a
nite number of truth-operations to elementary propositions.

Here it becomes clear that there are no such things as logical
objects or logical constants (in the sense of frege and russell).

For all those results of truth-operations on truth-functions are
identical, which are one and the same truth-function of elemen-
tary propositions.

That , , etc. , are not relations in the sense of right and left,

etc. , is obvious.

The possibility of crosswise denition of the logical primitive

signs of frege and russell shows by itself that these are not

primitive signs and that they signify no relations.

And it is obvious that the which we dene by means of
and is identical with that by which we dene with
the help of , and that this is the same as the rst, and

so on.

P others that from a fact an innite number of should follow,

p p namely, , etc. , is indeed hardly to be believed, and

it is no less wonderful that the innite number of propositions of

logic (of mathematics) should follow from half a dozen primitive

propositions.

But all propositions of logic say the same thing. That is,
nothing.

62
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.44 truth-functions are not material functions.

5.441 e. G. If an armation can be produced by repeated denial, is
5.442
5.45 the denialin any sensecontained in the armation?
5.451
p p p does
5.452 deny , or does it arm ; or both?

P the proposition does not treat of denial as an ob ject,

but the possibility of denial is already prejudged in armation.

P and if there was an object called , then would

p have to say something other than . For the one proposition

would then treat of , the other would not.

This disappearance of the apparent logical constants also occurs

if (x) . F x says the same as (x) . F x, or (x) . F x . X = a
f a the same as .

If a proposition is given to us then the results of all truth-

with operations which have it as their basis are given it.

If there are logical primitive signs a correct logic must make clear

their position relative to one another and justify their existence.

Out of the construction of logic its primitive signs must become

clear.

If logic has primitive ideas these must be independent of one an-

other. If a primitive idea is introduced it must be introduced in

all contexts in which it occurs at all. One cannot therefore intro-

one duce it for context and then again for another. For example,

if denial is introduced, we must understand it in propositions of

the form p, just as in propositions like (pq), (x). F x

and others. We may not rst introduce it for one class of cases

and then for another, for it would then remain doubtful whether

its meaning in the two cases was the same, and there would be

no reason to use the same way of symbolizing in the two cases.

(in short, what frege (grundgesetze der arithmetik) has
said about the introduction of signs by denitions holds, mutatis
mutandis, for the introduction of primitive signs also. )

the introduction of a new expedient in the symbolism of logic
must always be an event full of consequences. No new symbol
may be introduced in logic in brackets or in the marginwith,
so to speak, an entirely innocent face.

(thus in the principia mathematica of russell and white-

63
tractatus logico-philosophicus

head there occur denitions and primitive propositions in words.
Why suddenly words here? This would need a justication.
There was none, and can be none for the process is actually
not allowed. )

but if the introduction of a new expedient has proved nec-

essary in one place, we must immediately ask: where is this

always expedient to be used? Its position in logic must be made

clear.

5.453 all numbers in logic must be capable of justication.
Or rather it must become plain that there are no numbers

in logic.
There are no pre-eminent numbers.

5.454 in logic there is no side by side, there can be no classication.
In logic there cannot be a more general and a more special.

5.4541 the solution of logical problems must be simple for they set the
standard of simplicity.

Men have always thought that there must be a sphere of
questions whose answersa prioriare symmetrical and united
into a closed regular structure.

A sphere in which the proposition, simplex sigillum veri, is
valid.

5.46 when we have rightly introduced the logical signs, the sense of

all their combinations has been already introduced with them:

p q (p q) therefore not only
but also , etc. Etc. We

should then already have introduced the eect of all possible

combinations of brackets; and it would then have become clear

p q (x) . F x that the proper general primitive signs are not
, ,

etc. , but the most general form of their combinations.

5.461 the apparently unimportant fact that the apparent relations

like
and need bracketsunlike real relations is of great

importance.

The use of brackets with these apparent primitive signs shows
that these are not the real primitive signs; and nobody of course
would believe that the brackets have meaning by themselves.

5.4611 logical operation signs are punctuations.

64
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.47 beforehand it is clear that everything which can be said about

all on one occasion the form of
propositions at all can be said .

For all logical operations are already contained in the elemen-

f a (x) . F x . X = a tary proposition. For says the same as .

Where there is composition, there is argument and function,
and where these are, all logical constants already are.

All one could say: the one logical constant is that which

propositions, according to their nature, have in common with
one another.

That however is the general form of proposition.

5.471 the general form of proposition is the essence of proposition.

5.4711 to give the essence of proposition means to give the essence of
all description, therefore the essence of the world.

5.472 the description of the most general propositional form is the
description of the one and only general primitive sign in logic.

5.473 logic must take care of itself.

Possible a sign must also be able to signify. Everything

which is possible in logic is also permitted. (socrates is identi-

cal means nothing because there is no property which is called

identical. The proposition is senseless because we have not

made some arbitrary determination, not because the symbol is

in itself unpermissible. )

in a certain sense we cannot make mistakes in logic.

5.4731 self-evidence, of which russell has said so much, can only be

discarded in logic by language itself preventing every logical mis-

cannot take. That logic is a priori consists in the fact that we

think illogically.

5.4732 we cannot give a sign the wrong sense.

5.47321 occam's razor is, of course, not an arbitrary rule nor one justied

unnecessary by its practical success. It simply says that elements

in a symbolism mean nothing.

One signs which serve purpose are logically equivalent, signs

no which serve purpose are logically meaningless.

5.4733 frege says: every legitimately constructed proposition must
have a sense; and i say: every possible proposition is legit-

65
tractatus logico-philosophicus

imately constructed, and if it has no sense this can only be

meaning because we have given no to some of its constituent

parts.

(even if we believe that we have done so. )

thus socrates is identical says nothing, because we have

no adjective given
meaning to the word identical as . For when

it occurs as the sign of equality it symbolizes in an entirely dif-

ferent waythe symbolizing relation is anothertherefore the

symbol is in the two cases entirely dierent; the two symbols

have the sign in common with one another only by accident.

5.474 only the number of necessary fundamental operations depends
5.475
5.476 on our notation.
5.5
it is only a question of constructing a system of signs of a denite
5.501
number of dimensionsof a denite mathematical multiplicity.

Number of it is clear that we are not concerned here with a
primitive ideas which must be signied but with the expression

of a rule.

Every truth-function is a result of the successive application of

, . . . . The operation ( t)() to elementary propositions.

This operation denies all the propositions in the right-hand
bracket and i call it the negation of these propositions.

An expression in brackets whose terms are propositions i indi-
cateif the order of the terms in the bracket is indierentby

a sign of the form ( ). Is a variable whose values are the

terms of the expression in brackets, and the line over the variable
indicates that it stands for all its values in the bracket.

(thus if has the 3 values p, q, r, then ( ) = (p, q, r). )

the values of the variables must be determined.

The determination is the description of the propositions
which the variable stands for.

How the description of the terms of the expression in brackets
takes place is unessential.

We may distinguish 3 kinds of description: 1. Direct enu-

meration. In this case we can place simply its constant values

f x instead of the variable. 2. Giving a function, whose values for

x all values of are the propositions to be described. 3. Giving

66
tractatus logico-philosophicus

a formal law, according to which those propositions are con-
structed. In this case the terms of the expression in brackets are
all the terms of a formal series.

5.502 , . . . . N () therefore i write instead of ( t)(
5.503 ), .
5.51
5.511 n () is the negation of all the values of the propositional
5.512 variable .

5.513 as it is obviously easy to express how propositions can be con-
structed by means of this operation and how propositions are
5.514 not to be constructed by means of it, this must be capable of
exact expression.

N () = p p if has only one value, then
(not ), if it has two

values then n () = p . Q (neither p nor q).

How can the all-embracing logic which mirrors the world use
such special catches and manipulations? Only because all these
are connected into an innitely ne network, to the great mirror.

P p is true if is false. Therefore in the true proposition
p p is a false proposition. How then can the stroke

bring it into agreement with reality?

P that which denies in is however not , but that which
p all signs of this notation, which deny , have in common.

P p hence the common rule according to which , ,

p p p . P
, , etc. Etc. (to innity) are constructed. And

this which is common to them all mirrors denial.

We could say: what is common to all symbols, which assert

p q p . Q both and , is the proposition . What is common to all

p q p q symbols, which assert either or , is the proposition .

And similarly we can say: two propositions are opposed

to one another when they have nothing in common with one

another; and every proposition has only one negative, because

there is only one proposition which lies altogether outside it.

Q : p p thus even in russell's notation it is evident that

q p p says the same as ; that says nothing.

If a notation is xed, there is in it a rule according to which

p all the propositions denying are constructed, a rule according
p to which all the propositions asserting are constructed, a rule

67
tractatus logico-philosophicus

p q according to which all the propositions asserting or are con-

structed, and so on. These rules are equivalent to the symbols
and in them their sense is mirrored.

5.515 it must be recognized in our symbols that what is connected by

. , , etc. , must be propositions.

P q and this is the case, for the symbols and presuppose

p p q , , etc. If the sign in does not stand for a

complex sign, then by itself it cannot have sense; but then also

p p p . P p the signs
, , etc. Which have the same sense as

p p p q have no sense. If, however,
has no sense, then also

can have no sense.

5.5151 must the sign of the negative proposition be constructed by

means of the sign of the positive? Why should one not be able

to express the negative proposition by means of a negative fact?

A b (like: if does not stand in a certain relation to , it could

arb express that is not the case. )

but here also the negative proposition is indirectly con-

structed with the positive.

Proposition the positive must presuppose the existence of

proposition the negative and conversely.

5.52 f x if the values of are the total values of a function for all
5.521
values of x, then n () = (x) . F x.

All i separate the concept from the truth-function.

Frege and russell have introduced generality in connexion

with the logical product or the logical sum. Then it would be

(x) . F x (x) . F x dicult to understand the propositions
and

in which both ideas lie concealed.

5.522 that which is peculiar to the symbolism of generality is rstly,
that it refers to a logical prototype, and secondly, that it makes
constants prominent.

5.523 the generality symbol occurs as an argument.
5.524
all if the objects are given, therewith are objects also given.
5.525
all if the elementary propositions are given, then therewith

elementary propositions are also given.

(x) . F x it is not correct to render the proposition as russell

possible f x doesin words is .

68
tractatus logico-philosophicus

certainty, possibility or impossibility of a state of aairs are
not expressed by a proposition but by the fact that an expression
is a tautology, a signicant proposition or a contradiction.

That precedent to which one would always appeal, must be
present in the symbol itself.

5.526 one can describe the world completely by completely general-

i. E. Ized propositions, without from the outset co-ordinating any

name with a denite ob ject.

In order then to arrive at the customary way of expression

we need simply say after an expression there is one and only

x . . . . X a one , which
: and this is .

5.5261 a completely generalized proposition is like every other proposi-

(x, ) . X tion composite. (this is shown by the fact that in

x we must mention and separately. Both stand indepen-

dently in signifying relations to the world as in the ungeneralized

proposition. )

a characteristic of a composite symbol: it has something in

other common with symbols.

5.5262 every the truth or falsehood of proposition alters something

in the general structure of the world. And the range which is

allowed to its structure by the totality of elementary proposi-

tions is exactly that which the completely general propositions

delimit.

(if an elementary proposition is true, then, at any rate, there

more is one elementary proposition true. )

5.53 identity of the ob ject i express by identity of the sign and not by
means of a sign of identity. Dierence of the ob jects by dierence
of the signs.

5.5301 that identity is not a relation between objects is obvious. This

becomes very clear if, for example, one considers the proposition

(x) : f x. . X = a . What this proposition says is simply that

only a f satises the function , and not that only such things

f a satisfy the function which have a certain relation to .

Only a one could of course say that in fact has this relation

a to , but in order to express this we should need the sign of

identity itself.

69
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.5302 russell's denition of = won't do; because according to it one
5.5303
cannot say that two objects have all their properties in com-

mon. (even if this proposition is never true, it is nevertheless

signicant. )

two roughly speaking: to say of things that they are identical is

one nonsense, and to say of thing that it is identical with itself

is to say nothing.

5.531 i write therefore not f (a, b) . A = b, but f (a, a) (or f (b, b)).
And not f (a, b) . A = b, but f (a, b).

5.532 and analogously: not (x, y). F (x, y). X = y, but (x). F (x, x);
5.5321 and not (x, y) . F (x, y) . X = y, but (x, y) . F (x, y).

(therefore instead of russell's (x, y) . F (x, y): (x, y) .
F (x, y) . . (x) . F (x, x). )

e. G. Instead of (x) : f x x = a we therefore write (x). F x.

. F a : (x, y) . F x . F y.

Only and the proposition one x satises f () reads: (x) .

F x : (x, y) . F x . F y.

5.533 the identity sign is therefore not an essential constituent of log-
5.534 ical notation.

A = a a = b . B = and we see that apparent propositions like:
,

c. A = c, (x) . X = x, (x) . X = a, etc. Cannot be written

in a correct logical notation at all.

5.535 so all problems disappear which are connected with such pseu-
do-propositions.

This is the place to solve all the problems which arise through
russell's axiom of innity.

What the axiom of innity is meant to say would be ex-
pressed in language by the fact that there is an innite number
of names with dierent meanings.

5.5351 there are certain cases in which one is tempted to use expres-

a = a p p sions of the form
or and of that kind. And

indeed this takes place when one would like to speak of the

principles archetype proposition, thing, etc. So russell in the
of mathematics p has rendered the nonsense is a proposition in

p p symbols by and has put it as hypothesis before certain

70
tractatus logico-philosophicus

propositions to show that their places for arguments could only

be occupied by propositions.

P p (it is nonsense to place the hypothesis before a propo-

sition in order to ensure that its arguments have the right form,

because the hypothesis for a non-proposition as argument be-

comes not false but meaningless, and because the proposition

itself becomes senseless for arguments of the wrong kind, and

therefore it survives the wrong arguments no better and no worse

than the senseless hypothesis attached for this purpose. )

5.5352 similarly it was proposed to express there are no things by

(x) . X = x . But even if this were a propositionwould it

not be true if indeed there were things, but these were not

identical with themselves?

5.54 in the general propositional form, propositions occur in a prop-
osition only as bases of the truth-operations.

5.541 at rst sight it appears as if there were also a dierent way in
5.542 which one proposition could occur in another.

Especially in certain propositional forms of psychology, like

p p a thinks, that is the case, or a thinks , etc.
P here it appears supercially as if the proposition stood to

the ob ject a in a kind of relation.

(and in modern epistemology (russell, moore, etc. ) those
propositions have been conceived in this way. )

p p p but it is clear that a believes that , a thinks , a says ,
p p are of the form ` ' says : and here we have no co-ordination

of a fact and an object, but a co-ordination of facts by means of
a co-ordination of their ob jects.

5.5421 this shows that there is no such thing as the soulthe subject,
etc. As it is conceived in contemporary supercial psychology.

A composite soul would not be a soul any longer.

5.5422 the correct explanation of the form of the proposition a judges

p must show that it is impossible to judge a nonsense. (russell's

theory does not satisfy this condition. )

5.5423 to perceive a complex means to perceive that its constituents
are combined in such and such a way.

71
tractatus logico-philosophicus
this perhaps explains that the gure

can be seen in two ways as a cube; and all similar phenomena.

For we really see two dierent facts.

A b (if i x my eyes rst on the corners and only glance at ,
a b appears in front and behind, and vice versa. )

5.55 we must now answer a priori the question as to all possible forms
of the elementary propositions.

The elementary proposition consists of names. Since we can-
not give the number of names with dierent meanings, we cannot
give the composition of the elementary proposition.

5.551 our fundamental principle is that every question which can be
decided at all by logic can be decided without further trouble.

(and if we get into a situation where we need to answer such
a problem by looking at the world, this shows that we are on a
fundamentally wrong track. )

5.552 the experience which we need to understand logic is not that

is no such and such is the case, but that something ; but that is

experience.

Precedes so logic
every experiencethat something is .

It is before the how, not before the what.

5.5521 and if this were not the case, how could we apply logic? We
could say: if there were a logic, even if there were no world, how
then could there be a logic, since there is a world?

5.553 russell said that there were simple relations between dierent
numbers of things (individuals). But between what numbers?
And how should this be decidedby experience?

(there is no pre-eminent number. )

72
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.554 the enumeration of any special forms would be entirely arbi-
trary.

5.5541 it should be possible to decide a priori whether, for example, i
can get into a situation in which i need to symbolize with a sign
of a 27-termed relation.

5.5542 may we then ask this at all? Can we set out a sign form and

not know whether anything can correspond to it?

Be has the question sense: what must in order that some-

thing can be the case?

5.555 it is clear that we have a concept of the elementary proposition
apart from its special logical form.

Where, however, we can build symbols according to a system,
there this system is the logically important thing and not the
single symbols.

And how would it be possible that i should have to deal with
forms in logic which i can invent: but i must have to deal with
that which makes it possible for me to invent them.

5.556 there cannot be a hierarchy of the forms of the elementary prop-
ositions. Only that which we ourselves construct can we foresee.

5.5561 empirical reality is limited by the totality of objects. The
boundary appears again in the totality of elementary propo-
sitions.

The hierarchies are and must be independent of reality.

5.5562 if we know on purely logical grounds, that there must be ele-
mentary propositions, then this must be known by everyone who
understands the propositions in their unanalysed form.

5.5563 all propositions of our colloquial language are actually, just as
they are, logically completely in order. That most simple thing
which we ought to give here is not a simile of truth but the
complete truth itself.

(our problems are not abstract but perhaps the most con-

crete that there are. )

5.557 application the of logic decides what elementary propositions

there are.

What lies in the application logic cannot anticipate.

73
tractatus logico-philosophicus

it is clear that logic may not collide with its application.
But logic must have contact with its application.
Therefore logic and its application may not overlap one an-
other.

5.5571 if i cannot give elementary propositions a priori then it must
5.6 lead to obvious nonsense to try to give them.

The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.

5.61 logic lls the world: the limits of the world are also its limits.

We cannot therefore say in logic: this and this there is in
the world, that there is not.

For that would apparently presuppose that we exclude cer-
tain possibilities, and this cannot be the case since otherwise
logic must get outside the limits of the world: that is, if it could
consider these limits from the other side also.

What we cannot think, that we cannot think: we cannot

say therefore what we cannot think.

5.62 this remark provides a key to the question, to what extent solip-

sism is a truth.

Means in fact what solipsism , is quite correct, only it cannot

said be, but it shows itself.

My that the world is world, shows itself in the fact that the

limits of the language (the language which only i understand)

my mean the limits of world.

5.621 the world and life are one.

5.63 i am my world. (the microcosm. )

5.631 the thinking, presenting sub ject; there is no such thing.

If i wrote a book the world as i found it, i should also have

therein to report on my body and say which members obey my

will and which do not, etc. This then would be a method of

isolating the subject or rather of showing that in an important

sense there is no sub ject: that is to say, of it alone in this book

not mention could be made.

5.632 the sub ject does not belong to the world but it is a limit of the
world.

74
tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.633 where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be noted?

You say that this case is altogether like that of the eye and

not the eld of sight. But you do really see the eye.

In the eld of sight and from nothing can it be concluded

that it is seen from an eye.

5.6331 for the eld of sight has not a form like this:

5.634 this is connected with the fact that no part of our experience is
also a priori.
5.64
5.641 everything we see could also be otherwise.
Everything we can describe at all could also be otherwise.
6 there is no order of things a priori.
6.001
6.002 here we see that solipsism strictly carried out coincides with
pure realism. The i in solipsism shrinks to an extensionless
point and there remains the reality co-ordinated with it.

There is therefore really a sense in which in philosophy we can
talk of a non-psychological i.

The i occurs in philosophy through the fact that the world
is my world.

The philosophical i is not the man, not the human body or
the human soul of which psychology treats, but the metaphysical
subject, the limitnot a part of the world.

[p, , n ()] the general form of truth-function is:.

This is the general form of proposition.

This says nothing else than that every proposition is the result of

n () successive applications of the operation to the elementary

propositions.

If we are given the general form of the way in which a proposition
is constructed, then thereby we are also given the general form of
the way in which by an operation out of one proposition another
can be created.

75
tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.01 () the general form of the operation is therefore: [, n ()]()
6.02
(= [, , n ()]).

This is the most general form of transition from one propo-
sition to another.

And thus we come to numbers: i dene

x = 0x def. And
x = +1x def.

According, then, to these symbolic rules we write the series

x, x, x, x . . . . .

As: 0x, 0+1x, 0+1+1x, 0+1+1+1x . . . . .

,
[x, , ] therefore i write in place of

"[0x, x, +1x].

And i dene:

0 + 1 = 1 def.
0 + 1 + 1 = 2 def.
0 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 def.

And so on.

6.021 a number is the exponent of an operation.
6.022
the concept number is nothing else than that which is common
6.03 to all numbers, the general form of number.
6.031
6.1 the concept number is the variable number.

And the concept of equality of numbers is the general form
of all special equalities of numbers.

[0, , + 1] the general form of the cardinal number is: .

The theory of classes is altogether superuous in mathematics.

This is connected with the fact that the generality which we

accidental need in mathematics is not the one.

The propositions of logic are tautologies.

76
tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.11 the propositions of logic therefore say nothing. (they are the
analytical propositions. )

6.111 theories which make a proposition of logic appear substantial

e. G. Are always false. One could believe that the words true

and false signify two properties among other properties, and

then it would appear as a remarkable fact that every proposi-

tion possesses one of these properties. This now by no means

appears self-evident, no more so than the proposition all roses

are either yellow or red would sound even if it were true. Indeed

our proposition now gets quite the character of a proposition of

natural science and this is a certain symptom of its being falsely

understood.

6.112 the correct explanation of logical propositions must give them
a peculiar position among all propositions.

6.113 it is the characteristic mark of logical propositions that one can
6.12
perceive in the symbol alone that they are true; and this fact

contains in itself the whole philosophy of logic. And so also it is

one of the most important facts that the truth or falsehood of

not non-logical propositions can be recognized from the propo-

sitions alone.

Shows the fact that the propositions of logic are tautologies the

formallogicalproperties of language, of the world.

In this way that its constituent parts connected together

give a tautology characterizes the logic of its constituent parts.

In order that propositions connected together in a denite

way may give a tautology they must have denite properties of

so structure. That they give a tautology when connected shows

therefore that they possess these properties of structure.

6.1201 e. G. P p (p . That
the propositions and in the connexion

p) give a tautology shows that they contradict one another.

P q p q that the propositions
, and connected together

in the form (p q) . (p) : : (q) give a tautology shows that q

follows from p and p q. That (x) . F x : : f a is a tautology

f a (x) . F x shows that
follows from , etc. Etc.

6.1202 it is clear that we could have used for this purpose contradictions
instead of tautologies.

77
tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.1203 in order to recognize a tautology as such, we can, in cases in

which no sign of generality occurs in the tautology, make use

p q of the following intuitive method: i write instead of , ,

r t pf t qf t rf , etc. ,
, , , etc. The truth-combinations i

e. G. Express by brackets, :

and the co-ordination of the truth or falsity of the whole prop-
osition with the truth-combinations of the truth-arguments by
lines in the following way:

this sign, for example, would therefore present the proposi-

p q tion . Now i will proceed to inquire whether such a prop-

(p . P) osition as (the law of contradiction) is a tautology.

The form is written in our notation

. The form thus:

78
tractatus logico-philosophicus

(p . Q) hence the proposition runs thus:

p q if here we put instead of and examine the combination

of the outermost t and f with the innermost, it is seen that

all the truth of the whole proposition is co-ordinated with the

truth-combinations of its argument, its falsity with none of the

truth-combinations.

6.121 the propositions of logic demonstrate the logical properties of
propositions, by combining them into propositions which say
nothing.

This method could be called a zero-method. In a logical
proposition propositions are brought into equilibrium with one
another, and the state of equilibrium then shows how these prop-
ositions must be logically constructed.

6.122 whence it follows that we can get on without logical proposi-
tions, for we can recognize in an adequate notation the formal
properties of the propositions by mere inspection.

6.1221 p q if for example two propositions and give a tautology in

p q q p the connexion
, then it is clear that follows from .

E. G. Q p q . P that follows from we see from these two

propositions themselves, but we can also show it by combining

p q. P : : q them to and then showing that this is a tautology.

6.1222 this throws light on the question why logical propositions can
no more be empirically established than they can be empirically
refuted. Not only must a proposition of logic be incapable of
being contradicted by any possible experience, but it must also
be incapable of being established by any such.

6.1223 it now becomes clear why we often feel as though logical truths

79
tractatus logico-philosophicus

postulated must be by us. We can in fact postulate them in so

far as we can postulate an adequate notation.

6.1224 it also becomes clear why logic has been called the theory of
forms and of inference.

6.123 it is clear that the laws of logic cannot themselves obey further
logical laws.

(there is not, as russell supposed, for every type a special
law of contradiction; but one is sucient, since it is not applied
to itself. )

6.1231 the mark of logical propositions is not their general validity.
To be general is only to be accidentally valid for all things.

An ungeneralized proposition can be tautologous just as well as
a generalized one.

6.1232 logical general validity, we could call essential as opposed to

e. G. Accidental general validity, of the proposition all men are

mortal. Propositions like russell's axiom of reducibility are

not logical propositions, and this explains our feeling that, if

true, they can only be true by a happy chance.

6.1233 we can imagine a world in which the axiom of reducibility is
not valid. But it is clear that logic has nothing to do with the
question whether our world is really of this kind or not.

6.124 the logical propositions describe the scaolding of the world,

or rather they present it. They treat of nothing. They pre-

suppose that names have meaning, and that elementary propo-

sitions have sense. And this is their connexion with the world.

It is clear that it must show something about the world that

certain combinations of symbolswhich essentially have a def-

inite characterare tautologies. Herein lies the decisive point.

We said that in the symbols which we use much is arbitrary,

much not. In logic only this expresses: but this means that in

we logic it is not who express, by means of signs, what we want,

but in logic the nature of the essentially necessary signs itself

asserts. That is to say, if we know the logical syntax of any sign

language, then all the propositions of logic are already given.

6.125 it is possible, even in the old logic, to give at the outset a de-
scription of all true logical propositions.

80
tractatus logico-philosophicus

never 6.1251 hence there can be surprises in logic.

6.126 whether a proposition belongs to logic can be determined by

symbol determining the logical properties of the .

And this we do when we prove a logical proposition. For

without troubling ourselves about a sense and a meaning, we

symbolic form the logical propositions out of others by mere
rules.

We prove a logical proposition by creating it out of other

logical propositions by applying in succession certain operations,

which again generate tautologies out of the rst. (and from a

follow tautology only tautologies. )

naturally this way of showing that its propositions are tau-
tologies is quite unessential to logic. Because the propositions,
from which the proof starts, must show without proof that they
are tautologies.

6.1261 in logic process and result are equivalent. (therefore no sur-
prises. )

6.1262 proof in logic is only a mechanical expedient to facilitate the
recognition of tautology, where it is complicated.

6.1263 it would be too remarkable, if one could prove a signicant prop-

logically also osition
from another, and a logical proposition . It

is clear from the beginning that the logical proof of a signicant

in proposition and the proof logic must be two quite dierent

things.

6.1264 the signicant proposition asserts something, and its proof
shows that it is so; in logic every proposition is the form of a
proof.

Every proposition of logic is a modus ponens presented in
signs. (and the modus ponens can not be expressed by a prop-
osition. )

6.1265 logic can always be conceived to be such that every proposition
is its own proof.

6.127 all propositions of logic are of equal rank; there are not some
which are essentially primitive and others deduced from these.

Every tautology itself shows that it is a tautology.

81
tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.1271 it is clear that the number of primitive propositions of logic
is arbitrary, for we could deduce logic from one primitive prop-
osition by simply forming, for example, the logical product of
frege's primitive propositions. (frege would perhaps say that
this would no longer be immediately self-evident. But it is re-
markable that so exact a thinker as frege should have appealed
to the degree of self-evidence as the criterion of a logical propo-
sition. )

6.13 logic is not a theory but a reexion of the world.
Logic is transcendental.

6.2 mathematics is a logical method.
The propositions of mathematics are equations, and there-

fore pseudo-propositions.

6.21 mathematical propositions express no thoughts.

6.211 in life it is never a mathematical proposition which we need,

only but we use mathematical propositions in order to infer

from propositions which do not belong to mathematics to others

which equally do not belong to mathematics.

(in philosophy the question why do we really use that word,
that proposition? Constantly leads to valuable results. )

6.22 the logic of the world which the propositions of logic show in
tautologies, mathematics shows in equations.

6.23 if two expressions are connected by the sign of equality, this
means that they can be substituted for one another. But
whether this is the case must show itself in the two expressions
themselves.

It characterizes the logical form of two expressions, that they
can be substituted for one another.

6.231 it is a property of armation that it can be conceived as double

denial.

1 + 1 + 1 + 1 it is a property of that it can be conceived as

(1 + 1) + (1 + 1).

6.232 frege says that these expressions have the same meaning but
dierent senses.

But what is essential about equation is that it is not neces-

82
tractatus logico-philosophicus

sary in order to show that both expressions, which are connected
by the sign of equality, have the same meaning: for this can be
perceived from the two expressions themselves.

6.2321 and, that the propositions of mathematics can be proved means
6.2322 nothing else than that their correctness can be seen without our
having to compare what they express with the facts as regards
correctness.

As- the identity of the meaning of two expressions cannot be
serted. For in order to be able to assert anything about their

meaning, i must know their meaning, and if i know their mean-
ing, i know whether they mean the same or something dierent.

6.2323 the equation characterizes only the standpoint from which i
consider the two expressions, that is to say the standpoint of
their equality of meaning.

6.233 to the question whether we need intuition for the solution of
mathematical problems it must be answered that language itself
here supplies the necessary intuition.

6.2331 the process of calculation brings about just this intuition.
Calculation is not an experiment.

6.234 mathematics is a method of logic.

6.2341 the essential of mathematical method is working with equa-
tions. On this method depends the fact that every proposition
of mathematics must be self-intelligible.

6.24 the method by which mathematics arrives at its equations is
6.241 the method of substitution.
6.3
for equations express the substitutability of two expressions,
and we proceed from a number of equations to new equations,
replacing expressions by others in accordance with the equations.

2  2 = 4 thus the proof of the proposition runs:

( )x = x def.
22x = (2)2x = (2)1+1x = 22x = 1+11+1x

= ()()x = x = 1+1+1+1x = 4x.

All regularity logical research means the investigation of . And

outside logic all is accident.

83
tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.31 the so-called law of induction cannot in any case be a logical
6.32 law, for it is obviously a signicant proposition. And therefore
it cannot be a law a priori either.

The law of causality is not a law but the form of a law. *

6.321 law of causality is a class name. And as in mechanics there
6.3211
6.33 are, for instance, minimum-laws, such as that of least action, so

in physics there are causal laws, laws of the causality form.

A men had indeed an idea that there must be law of least ac-

tion, before they knew exactly how it ran. (here, as always,

the a priori certain proves to be something purely logical. )

believe know we do not
a priori in a law of conservation, but we

a priori the possibility of a logical form.

6.34 all propositions, such as the law of causation, the law of continu-
ity in nature, the law of least expenditure in nature, etc. Etc. , all
these are a priori intuitions of possible forms of the propositions
of science.

6.341 newtonian mechanics, for example, brings the description of the
universe to a unied form. Let us imagine a white surface with
irregular black spots. We now say: whatever kind of picture
these make i can always get as near as i like to its description,
if i cover the surface with a suciently ne square network and
now say of every square that it is white or black. In this way
i shall have brought the description of the surface to a unied
form. This form is arbitrary, because i could have applied with
equal success a net with a triangular or hexagonal mesh. It can
happen that the description would have been simpler with the
aid of a triangular mesh; that is to say we might have described
the surface more accurately with a triangular, and coarser, than
with the ner square mesh, or vice versa, and so on. To the
dierent networks correspond dierent systems of describing the
world. Mechanics determine a form of description by saying: all
propositions in the description of the world must be obtained in a
given way from a number of given propositionsthe mechanical
axioms. It thus provides the bricks for building the edice of
science, and says: whatever building thou wouldst erect, thou

*i. E. Not the form of one particular law, but of any law of a certain sort (b. R. ).

84
tractatus logico-philosophicus

shalt construct it in some manner with these bricks and these
alone.

(as with the system of numbers one must be able to write
down any arbitrary number, so with the system of mechanics one
must be able to write down any arbitrary physical proposition. )

6.342 and now we see the relative position of logic and mechanics.

(we could construct the network out of gures of dierent kinds,

as out of triangles and hexagons together. ) that a picture like

that instanced above can be described by a network of a given

nothing form asserts about the picture. (for this holds of every

this picture of this kind. ) but does characterize the picture, the

completely fact, namely, that it can be described by a denite

denite net of neness.

So too the fact that it can be described by newtonian me-

this chanics asserts nothing about the world; but asserts some-

thing, namely, that it can be described in that particular way in

which it is described, as is indeed the case. The fact, too, that it

can be described more simply by one system of mechanics than

by another says something about the world.

6.343 mechanics is an attempt to construct according to a single plan

true all propositions which we need for the description of the

world.

6.3431 through the whole apparatus of logic the physical laws still
speak of the ob jects of the world.

6.3432 we must not forget that the description of the world by me-

chanics is always quite general. There is, for example, never any

particular mention of material points in it, but always only of

some points or other.

6.35 although the spots in our picture are geometrical gures, ge-

ometry can obviously say nothing about their actual form and

purely position. But the network is geometrical, and all its prop-

erties can be given a priori.

Laws, like the law of causation, etc. , treat of the network and
not of what the network described.

6.36 if there were a law of causality, it might run: there are natural
laws.

85
tractatus logico-philosophicus

but that can clearly not be said: it shows itself.

6.361 uniform in the terminology of hertz we might say: only con-

nexions are thinkable.

6.3611 we cannot compare any process with the passage of time
there is no such thingbut only with another process (say, with
the movement of the chronometer).

Hence the description of the temporal sequence of events is
only possible if we support ourselves on another process.

It is exactly analogous for space. When, for example, we say

that neither of two events (which mutually exclude one another)

no cause can occur, because there is why the one should occur

rather than the other, it is really a matter of our being unable

one to describe of the two events unless there is some sort of

is asymmetry. And if there such an asymmetry, we can regard

cause this as the of the occurrence of the one and of the non-

occurrence of the other.

6.36111 the kantian problem of the right and left hand which cannot
be made to cover one another already exists in the plane, and
even in one-dimensional space; where the two congruent gures

a b and cannot be made to cover one another without moving

them out of this space. The right and left hand are in fact
completely congruent. And the fact that they cannot be made
to cover one another has nothing to do with it.

A right-hand glove could be put on a left hand if it could be
turned round in four-dimensional space.

6.362 what can be described can happen too, and what is excluded
6.363 by the law of causality cannot be described.

Simplest the process of induction is the process of assuming the

law that can be made to harmonize with our experience.

6.3631 this process, however, has no logical foundation but only a psy-
chological one.

It is clear that there are no grounds for believing that the
simplest course of events will really happen.

86
tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.36311 that the sun will rise to-morrow, is an hypothesis; and that

know means that we do not whether it will rise.

6.37 a necessity for one thing to happen because another has hap-

logical pened does not exist. There is only necessity.

6.371 at the basis of the whole modern view of the world lies the
illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of
natural phenomena.

6.372 so people stop short at natural laws as at something unassail-
able, as did the ancients at god and fate.

And they both are right and wrong. But the ancients were

clearer, in so far as they recognized one clear conclusion, whereas

everything in the modern system it should appear as though were

explained.

6.373 the world is independent of my will.

6.374 even if everything we wished were to happen, this would only

6.375 logical be, so to speak, a favour of fate, for there is no connexion
6.3751
between will and world, which would guarantee this, and the

assumed physical connexion itself we could not again will.

Logical logical as there is only a
necessity, so there is only a

impossibility.

E. G. For two colours, to be at one place in the visual eld, is

impossible, logically impossible, for it is excluded by the logical

structure of colour.

Let us consider how this contradiction presents itself in phys-

ics. Somewhat as follows: that a particle cannot at the same

i. E. Time have two velocities, that at the same time it cannot be

i. E. In two places, that particles in dierent places at the same

time cannot be identical.

(it is clear that the logical product of two elementary prop-
ositions can neither be a tautology nor a contradiction. The as-
sertion that a point in the visual eld has two dierent colours
at the same time, is a contradiction. )

6.4 all propositions are of equal value.

6.41 the sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the world

in everything is as it is and happens as it does happen. It there

is no valueand if there were, it would be of no value.

87
tractatus logico-philosophicus

if there is a value which is of value, it must lie outside all

happening and being-so. For all happening and being-so is ac-

cidental.

In what makes it non-accidental cannot lie the world, for

otherwise this would again be accidental.

It must lie outside the world.

6.42 hence also there can be no ethical propositions.
Propositions cannot express anything higher.

6.421 it is clear that ethics cannot be expressed.
Ethics are transcendental.
(ethics and sthetics are one. )

6.422 the rst thought in setting up an ethical law of the form thou

shalt . . . Is: and what if i do not do it. But it is clear that

ethics has nothing to do with punishment and reward in the

consequences ordinary sense. This question as to the of an action

must therefore be irrelevant. At least these consequences will not

be events. For there must be something right in that formulation

of the question. There must be some sort of ethical reward and

ethical punishment, but this must lie in the action itself.

(and this is clear also that the reward must be something
acceptable, and the punishment something unacceptable. )

6.423 of the will as the bearer of the ethical we cannot speak.
And the will as a phenomenon is only of interest to psychol-

ogy.

6.43 if good or bad willing changes the world, it can only change the
limits of the world, not the facts; not the things that can be
expressed in language.

In brief, the world must thereby become quite another. It
must so to speak wax or wane as a whole.

The world of the happy is quite another than that of the
unhappy.

6.431 as in death, too, the world does not change, but ceases.

6.4311 death is not an event of life. Death is not lived through.
If by eternity is understood not endless temporal duration

but timelessness, then he lives eternally who lives in the present.

88
tractatus logico-philosophicus

our life is endless in the way that our visual eld is without
limit.

6.4312 the temporal immortality of the soul of man, that is to say, its

eternal survival also after death, is not only in no way guaran-

teed, but this assumption in the rst place will not do for us

what we always tried to make it do. Is a riddle solved by the

fact that i survive for ever? Is this eternal life not as enigmatic

as our present one? The solution of the riddle of life in space

outside and time lies space and time.

(it is not problems of natural science which have to be

solved. )

6.432 how the world is, is completely indierent for what is higher.

In god does not reveal himself the world.

6.4321 the facts all belong only to the task and not to its performance.
6.44
how that not
the world is, is the mystical, but it is.

6.45 the contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its contem-
plation as a limited whole.

The feeling of the world as a limited whole is the mystical
feeling.

6.5 for an answer which cannot be expressed the question too can-
6.51
6.52 not be expressed.

The riddle does not exist.

Can if a question can be put at all, then it also be answered.

Not scepticism is irrefutable, but palpably senseless, if it would

doubt where a question cannot be asked.

For doubt can only exist where there is a question; a question

only where there is an answer, and this only where something

can be said.

All possible we feel that even if scientic questions be answered,

the problems of life have still not been touched at all. Of course

there is then no question left, and just this is the answer.

6.521 the solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of
this problem.

(is not this the reason why men to whom after long doubting

89
tractatus logico-philosophicus

the sense of life became clear, could not then say wherein this

sense consisted? )

6.522 shows there is indeed the inexpressible. This itself; it is the
6.53
mystical.
6.54
7 the right method of philosophy would be this. To say nothing

i. E. Except what can be said, the propositions of natural science,

i. E. Something that has nothing to do with philosophy: and then

always, when someone else wished to say something metaphys-

ical, to demonstrate to him that he had given no meaning to

certain signs in his propositions. This method would be un-

satisfying to the otherhe would not have the feeling that we

were teaching him philosophybut it would be the only strictly

correct method.

My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands
me nally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out
through them, on them, over them. (he must so to speak throw
away the ladder, after he has climbed up on it. )

he must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world
rightly.

Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.